Ferdydurke
Translated	from	the	Polish	by	Danuta	Borchardt
Foreword	by	Susan	Sontag
©	1938	Translation	copyright	©	2000
	
	Contents
Foreword	
Susan	Sontag
Translator's	Note
Acknowledgments
1	Abduction
2	Imprisonment	and	Further	Belittlement
3	Caught	with	His	Pants	Down	and	Further	Kneading
4	Preface	to	"The	Child	Runs	Deep	in	Filidor"
5	The	Child	Runs	Deep	in	Filidor
6	Seduction	and	Further	Driving	Me	into	Youth
7	Love
8	Fruit	Compote
9	Peeping	and	Further	Incursion	into	Modernity
10	Legs	on	the	Loose	and	New	Entrapment
11	Preface	to	"The	Child	Runs	Deep	in	Filibert"
12	The	Child	Runs	Deep	in	Filibert
13	The	Farmhand,	or	Captive	Again
14	Mug	on	the	Loose	and	New	Entrapment
	
	Foreword	
Susan	Sontag
Start	with	the	title.	Which	means	.	.	.	nothing.	There	is	no	character	in	the	novel
called	Ferdydurke.	And	this	is	only	a	foretaste	of	insolence	to	come.	Published
in	late	1937,	when	its	author	was	thirty three,	
Ferdydurke	
is	the	great	Polish
writer's	second	book.	The	title	of	his	first,	
Memoirs	of	a	Time	of	Immaturity
(1933),	would	have	served	beautifully	for	the	novel.	Perhaps	this	is	why
Gombrowicz	opted	for	jabberwocky.
That	first	book,	whose	title	was	pounced	on	by	the	Warsaw	reviewers	as	if
Gombrowicz	had	made	a	shaming	confession	inadvertently,	was	a	collection	of
stories	(he'd	been	publishing	them	in	magazines	since	1926);	over	the	next	two
years	more	stories	appeared,	including	a	pair	("The	Child	Runs	Deep	in	Filidor"
and	"The	Child	Runs	Deep	in	Filibert")	that	he	would	use,	with	chapter long
mock	prefaces,	as	interludes	in	
Ferdydurke,	
as	well	as	a	first	play,	
Princess
Ivona;	
then,	in	early	1935,	he	embarked	on	a	novel.	Had	the	title	of	his	volume
of	fanciful	stories	seemed—his	word—"ill chosen"?	Now	he	would	
really
provoke.	He	would	write	an	epic	in	defense	of	immaturity.	As	he	declared
toward	the	end	of	his	life:
"Immaturity—what	a	compromising,	disagreeable	word!—became	my	war	cry."
Immaturity	(not	youth)	is	the	word	Gombrowicz	insists	on,	insists	on	because	it
represents	something	unattractive,	something,	to	use	another	of	his	key	words,
inferior.	
The	longing	his	novel	describes,	and	endorses,	is	not,	Faust like,	to
relive	the	glory	days	of	youth.	What	happens	to	the	thirty year old	who,	waking
up	one	morning	roiled	in	the	conviction	of	the	futility	of	his	life	and	all	his
projects,	is	abducted	by	a	teacher	and	returned	to	the	world	of	callow
schoolboys,	is	a	humiliation,	a	fall.
From	the	start,	Gombrowicz	was	to	write,	he	had	chosen	to	adopt	a	"fantastic,
eccentric,	and	bizarre	tone"	bordering	on	"mania,	folly,	absurdity."	To	irritate,
Gombrowicz	might	have	said,	is	to	conquer.	I	think,	therefore	I	contradict.	A
young	aspirant	to	glory	in	1930s	literary	Warsaw,	Gombrowicz	had	already
become	legendary	in	the	writers'	cafés	for	his	madcap	grimaces	and	poses.	On
the	page,	he	sought	an	equally	vehement	relation	to	the	reader.	Grandiose	and
goofy,	this	is	a	work	of	unrelenting	
address.
Still,	it	seems	likely	that	Gombrowicz	did	not	know	where	he	was	going	when
he	began	the	novel.	"I	can	well	remember,"	Gombrowicz	declared	in	1968,	a
year	before	he	died	
(did	
he	remember?	or	was	he	massaging	his	legend?),	
that,
when	I	started	
Ferdydurke,	
I	wanted	to	write	no	more	than	a	biting	satire	thatwould	put	me	in	a	superior	position	over	my	enemies.	But	my	words	were	soon
whirled	away	in	a	violent	dance,	they	took	the	bit	between	their	teeth	and
galloped	towards	a	grotesque	lunacy	with	such	speed	that	I	had	to	rewrite	the
first	part	of	the	book	in	order	to	give	it	the	same	grotesque	intensity.
But	the	problem	was	less	(I	suspect)	that	the	first	chapters	needed	a	further
infusion	of	lunatic	energies	than	that	Gombrowicz	did	not	anticipate	the	freight
of	argument—about	the	nature	of	eros,	about	culture	(particularly	Polish
culture),	about	ideals—his	tale	would	carry.
Ferdydurke	
starts	with	a	dreamlike	abduction	to	an	absurd	world,	in	which	the
big	become	small	and	the	small	monstrously	big:	those	great	buttocks	in	the	sky.
In	contrast	to	the	landscape	Lewis	Carroll	conjured	up	for	a	prepubescent	girl,
Gombrowicz's	wonderland	of	shape shiftings	and	re sizings	seethes	with	lust.
Everything	was	expanding	in	blackness.	Inflating	and	widening,	yet	at	the	same
time	shrinking	and	straining,	evading	something,	and	some	kind	of	winnowing,
general	and	particular,	a	coagulating	tension	and	a	tensing	coagulation,	a
dangling	by	a	fine	thread,	as	well	as	transformation	into	something,
transmutation,	and	furthermore—a	falling	into	some	cumulative,	towering
system,	and	as	if	on	a	narrow	little	plank	raised	six	stories	up,	together	with	the
excitement	of	all	organs.	And	tickling.
In	Alice's	story,	a	child	falls	into	an	asexual	underworld	governed	by	a	new,
fantastic	but	implacable	logic.	In	
Ferdydurke,	
the	grownup	who	is	turned	into	a
schoolboy	discovers	new,	puerile	freedoms	for	giving	offense	and	owning	up	to
disreputable	desire.
Starts	with	an	abduction;	ends	with	an	abduction.	The	first	(by	Professor	Pimko)
returns	the	protagonist	to	the	scene	of	true,	that	is,	unmanageable,	feeling	and
desire.	The	second	abduction	shows	the	protagonist	making	a	provisional	flight
back	into	so called	maturity.
If	someone	were	to	spot	me	in	the	hallway,	in	the	darkness,	how	would	I	explain
this	escapade?	How	do	we	find	ourselves	on	these	tortuous	and	abnormal
roads?	Normality	is	a	tightrope walker	above	the	abyss	of	abnormality.	How
much	potential	madness	is	contained	in	the	everyday	order	of	things—you	never
know	when	and	how	the	course	of	events	will	lead	you	to	kidnap	a	farmhand	and
take	to	the	fields.	It's	Zosia	that	I	should	be	kidnapping.	If	anyone,	it	should	be
Zosia,	kidnapping	Zosia	from	a	country	manor	would	be	the	normal	and	correct
thing	to	do,	if	anyone	it	was	Zosia,	and	not	this	stupid,	idiotic	farmhand	.	.	.
Ferdydurke	
is	one	of	the	most	bracing,	direct	books	ever	written	about	sexualdesire—this	without	a	single	scene	of	sexual	union.	To	be	sure,	the	cards	are
stacked	from	the	start	in	favor	of	eros.	Who	would	not	concur	in	the	silencing	of
this	
social	babble	by	the	clamor	of	rumps,	thighs,	calves?	The	head	commands,
or	wishes	to.	The	buttocks	reign.
Later,	Gombrowicz	referred	to	his	novel	as	a	pamphlet.	He	also	called	it	a
parody	of	a	philosophical	tale	in	the	manner	of	Voltaire.	Gombrowicz	is	one	of
the	super arguers	of	the	twentieth	century—	
"To	contradict,	
even	on	little
matters,"	he	declared,	"is	the	supreme	necessity	of	art	today"—and	
Ferdydurke
is	a	dazzling	novel	of	ideas.	These	ideas	give	the	novel	both	weight	and	wings.
Gombrowicz	capers	and	thunders,	hectors	and	mocks,	but	he	is	also	entirely
serious	about	his	project	of	transvaluation,	his	critique	of	high	"ideals."
Ferdydurke	
is	one	of	the	few	novels	I	know	that	could	be	called	Nietzschean;
certainly	it	is	the	only	comic	novel	that	could	be	so	described.	(The	affecting
fantasia	of	Hesse's	
Steppenwolf	
seems,	in	comparison,	riddled	with
sentimentality.)	Nietzsche	deplored	the	ascendancy	of	slave	values	sponsored	by
Christianity,	and	called	for	the	overthrowing	of	corrupt	ideals	and	for	new	forms
of	masterfulness.	Gombrowicz,	affirming	the	"human"	need	for	imperfection,
incompleteness,	inferiority	.	.	.	youth,	proclaims	himself	a	specialist	in
inferiority.	Swinish	adolescence	may	seem	a	drastic	antidote	to	smug	maturity,
but	this	is	exactly	what	Gombrowicz	has	in	mind.	"Degradation	became	my	ideal
forever.	I	worshipped	the	slave."	It	is	still	a	Nietzschean	project	of	unmasking,	of
exposing,	
with	a	merry	satyr dance	of	dualisms:	mature	versus	immature,	wholes
versus	parts,	clothed	versus	naked,	heterosexuality	versus	homosexuality,
complete	versus	incomplete.
Gombrowicz	gaily	deploys	many	of	the	devices	of	high	literary	modernism
lately	re labeled	"postmodern,"	which	tweak	the	traditional	decorums	of	novel
writing:	notably,	that	of	a	garrulous,	intrusive	narrator	awash	in	his	own
contradictory	emotional	states.	Burlesque	slides	into	pathos.	When	not	preening,
he	is	abject;	when	not	clowning,	he	is	vulnerable	and	self pitying.
An	immature	narrator	is	some	sort	of	candid	narrator;	even	one	who	flaunts	what
is	usually	hidden.	What	he	is	not	is	a	"sincere"	narrator,	sincerity	being	one	of
those	ideals	that	make	no	sense	in	the	world	of	candor	and	provocation.	"In
literature	sincerity	leads	nowhere	.	.	.	the	more	artificial	we	are,	the	closer	we
come	to	frankness.	Artificiality	allows	the	artist	to	approach	shameful	truths."	As
for	his	celebrated	
Diary,	
Gombrowicz	says:
Have	you	ever	read	a	"sincere"	diary?	The	"sincere"	diary	is	the	mostmendacious	diary	.	.	.	And,	in	the	long	run,	what	a	bore	sincerity	is!	It	is
ineffectual.
Then	what?	My	diary	had	to	he	sincere,	but	it	could	not	be	sincere.	How	could	I
solve	the	problem?	The	word,	the	loose,	spoken	word,	has	this	consoling
particularity:	it	is	close	to	sincerity,	not	in	what	it	confesses	but	in	what	it	claims
to	be	and	in	what	it	pursues.
So	I	had	to	avoid	turning	my	diary	into	a	confession.	I	had	to	show	myself	"in
action,"	in	my	intention	of	imposing	myself	on	the	reader	in	a	certain	way,	in	my
desire	to	create	myself	with	everyone	looking	on.	"This	is	how	I	would	like	to	be
for	you,"	and	not	"This	is	how	I	am."
Still,	however	fanciful	the	plot	of	
Ferdydurke,	
no	reader	will	regard	the
protagonist	and	his	longings	as	anything	other	than	a	transposition	of	the	author's
own	personality	and	pathology.	By	making	Joey	Kowalski	(as	the	Polish	name
of	the	protagonist narrator	is	here	rendered	in	English)	a	writer—and	the	author
of	an	unsuccessful,	much	derided	book	of	stories	entitled,	yes,	
Memoirs	of	a
Time	of	Immaturity—	
Gombrowicz	dares	the	reader	
not	
to	think	about	the	man
who	wrote	the	novel.
A	writer	who	revels	in	the	fantasy	of	renouncing	his	identity	and	its	privileges.	A
writer	who	imagines	a	flight	into	youth,	represented	as	a	kidnapping;	a
discarding	of	the	destiny	expected	of	an	adult,	represented	as	a	subtraction	from
the	world	in	which	one	is	known.
And	then	the	fantasy	came	true.	(Few	writers'	lives	have	so	clearly	taken	the
shape	of	a	destiny.)	At	the	age	of	thirty five,	a	few	days	short	of	the	fateful	date
of	September	1,	1939,	Gombrowicz	was	dropped	into	unexpected	exile,	far	from
Europe,	in	the	"immature"	New	World.	It	was	as	brutal	a	change	in	his	real	life
as	the	imagined	turning	of	a	thirty year old	man	into	a	schoolboy.	Stranded,
without	any	means	of	support,	where	nothing	was	expected	of	him,	because
nothing	was	known	about	him,	he	was	offered	the	divine	opportunity	to	lose
himself.	In	Poland,	he	was	well born	Witold	Gombrowicz,	a	prominent
"vanguard"	writer,	who	had	written	a	book	many	(including	his	friend,	the	other
great	Polish	writer	of	the	same	period,	Bruno	Schulz)	considered	a	masterpiece.
In	Argentina,	he	writes,	"I	was	nothing,	so	I	could	do	anything."
It	is	impossible	now	to	imagine	Gombrowicz	without	his	twenty four	years	in
Argentina	(much	of	which	was	spent	in	penury),	an	Argentina	he	made	to	suit
his	own	fantasies,	his	daring,	his	pride.	He	left	Poland	a	relatively	young	man;
he	returned	to	Europe	(but	never	to	Poland)	when	he	was	nearing	sixty,	and	diedsix	years	later	in	the	south	of	France.	Separation	from	Europe	was	not	the
making	of	Gombrowicz	as	a	writer:	the	man	who	published	
Ferdydurke	
two
years	earlier	was	already	fully	formed	as	a	literary	artist.	It	was,	rather,	the	most
providential	confirmation	of	everything	his	novel	knows,	and	gave	direction	and
bite	to	the	marvelous	writings	still	to	come.
The	ordeal	of	emigration—and	for	Gombrowicz	it	was	an	ordeal—sharpened	his
cultural	combativeness,	as	we	know	from	the	
Diary.	
The	
Diary—	
in	three
volumes	in	English,	and	anything	but	a	"personal"	diary—can	be	read	as	a	kind
of	free form	fiction,	postmodern	
avant	la	lettre,	
that	is,	animated	by	a	program
of	violating	decorum	similar	to	that	of	
Ferdydurke.	
Claims	for	the	staggering
genius	and	intellectual	acuity	of	the	author	vie	with	a	running	account	of	his
insecurities,	imperfections,	and	embarrassments,	and	a	defiant	avowal	of
barbaric,	yokel	prejudices.	Considering	himself	slighted	by,	and	therefore	eager
to	reject,	the	lively	literary	milieu	of	late	1930s	Buenos	Aires,	and	aware	that	it
harbored	one	indisputably	great	writer,	Gombrowicz	declared	himself	"at
opposite	poles"	from	Borges.	"He	is	deeply	rooted	in	literature,	I	in	life.	To	tell
the	truth	I	am	anti literature."
As	if	in	agreement,	shallow	agreement,	with	Gombrowicz's	entirely	self serving
quarrel	with	the	idea	of	literature,	many	now	regard	the	
Diary	
instead	of
Ferdydurke	
as	his	greatest	work.
No	one	can	forget	the	notorious	opening	of	the	
Diary:
Monday	Me.	Tuesday	Me.	Wednesday	Me.	Thursday	Me.
Having	got	
that	
straight,	Gombrowicz	devoted	Friday's	entry	to	a	subtle
reflection	on	some	material	he	had	been	reading	in	the	Polish	press.
Gombrowicz	expected	to	offend	with	his	egocentricity:	a	writer	must	continually
defend	his	borders.	But	a	writer	is	also	someone	who	must	abandon	borders,	and
egotism,	so	Gombrowicz	argued,	is	the	precondition	of	spiritual	and	intellectual
freedom.	In	the	"me	...	me	.	.	.	me	.	.	.	me"	one	hears	the	solitary	emigre
thumbing	his	nose	at	"we	...	we	...	we	..	.	we."	Gombrowicz	never	stopped
arguing	with	Polish	culture,	with	its	intractable	collectivism	of	spirit	(usually
called	"romanticism")	and	the	obsession	of	its	writers	with	the	national
martyrdom,	the	national	identity.	The	relentless	intelligence	and	energy	of	his
observations	on	cultural	and	artistic	matters,	the	pertinence	of	his	challenge	to
Polish	pieties,	his	bravura	contentiousness,	ended	by	making	him	the	most
influential	prose	writer	of	the	past	half	century	in	his	native	country.
The	Polish	sense	of	being	marginal	to	European	culture,	and	to	WesternEuropean	concern	while	enduring	generations	of	foreign	occupation,	had
prepared	the	hapless	émigré	writer	better	than	he	might	have	wished	to	endure
being	sentenced	to	many	years	of	near	total	isolation	as	a	writer.	Courageously,
he	embarked	on	the	enterprise	of	making	deep,	liberating	sense	out	of	the
unprotected ness	of	his	situation	in	Argentina.	Exile	tested	his	vocation	and
expanded	it.	Strengthening	his	disaffection	from	nationalist	pieties	and	self 
congratulation,	it	made	him	a	consummate	citizen	of	world	literature.
More	than	sixty	years	after	
Ferdydurke	
was	written,	little	remains	of	the
specifically	Polish	targets	of	Gombrowicz's	scorn.	These	have	vanished	along
with	the	Poland	in	which	he	was	reared	and	came	of	age—destroyed	by	the
multiple	blows	of	war,	Nazi	occupation,	Soviet	dominance	(which	prevented	him
from	ever	returning),	and	the	post 1989	ethos	of	consumerism.	Almost	as	dated
is	his	assumption	that	adults	always	claim	to	be	mature.
In	our	relations	with	other	people	we	want	to	be	cultivated,	superior,	mature,	so
we	use	the	language	of	maturity	and	we	talk	about,	for	instance,	Beauty,
Goodness,	Truth	
....	
But,	within	our	own	confidential,	intimate	reality,	we	feel
nothing	but	inadequacy,	immaturity	.	.	.
The	declaration	seems	from	another	world.	How	unlikely	it	would	be	for
whatever	embarrassing	inadequacies	people	feel	now	to	be	covered	over	with
hifalutin	absolutes	such	as	Beauty,	Goodness,	Truth.	The	European style	ideals
of	maturity,	cultivation,	wisdom	have	given	way	steadily	to	American style
celebrations	of	the	Forever	Young.	The	discrediting	of	literature	and	other
expressions	of	"high"	culture	as	elitist	or	anti life	is	a	staple	of	the	new	culture
ruled	by	entertainment	values.	Indiscretion	about	one's	unconventional	sexual
feelings	is	now	a	routine,	if	not	mandatory,	contribution	to	public	entertainment.
Anyone	now	who	would	claim	to	love	"the	inferior"	would	argue	that	it	is	not
inferior	at	all;	that	actually	it's	superior.	Hardly	any	of	the	cherished	opinions
against	which	Gombrowicz	contended	are	still	cherished.
Then	can	
Ferdydurke	
still	offend?	Still	seem	outrageous?	Exception	made	for
the	novel's	acidic	misogyny,	probably	not.	Does	it	still	seem	extravagant,
brilliant,	disturbing,	brave,	funny	.	.	.	wonderful?	Yes.
A	zealous	administrator	of	his	own	legend,	Gombrowicz	was	both	telling	and	not
telling	the	truth	when	he	claimed	to	have	successfully	avoided	all	forms	of
greatness.	But	whatever	he	thought,	or	wanted	us	to	think	he	thought,	that	cannot
happen	if	one	had	produced	a	masterpiece,	and	it	eventually	comes	to	be
acknowledged	as	such.	In	the	late	1950s	
Ferdydurke	
was	finally	translated(under	auspicious	sponsorship)	into	French,	and	Gombrowicz	was,	at	last,
"discovered."	He	had	wanted	nothing	more	than	this	success;	this	triumph	over
his	adversaries	and	detractors,	real	and	imagined.	But	the	writer	who	counseled
his	readers	to	try	to	avoid	all	expressions	of	themselves;	to	guard	against	all	their
beliefs,	and	to	mistrust	their	feelings;	above	all,	to	stop	identifying	themselves
with	what	defines	them,	could	hardly	fail	to	insist	that	he,	Gombrowicz,	was	not
that	book.	
Indeed,	he	has	to	be	inferior	to	it.	"The	work,	transformed	into	culture,
hovered	in	the	sky,	while	I	remained	below."	Like	the	great	backside	that	hovers
high	above	the	protagonist's	half hearted	flight	into	normality	at	the	end	of	the
novel,	
Ferdydurke	
has	floated	upward	to	the	literary	empyrean.	Long	live	its
sublime	mockery	of	all	attempts	to	normalize	desire	.	.	.	and	the	reach	of	great
literature.Translator's	Note
For	several	years	the	question	has	been	whether	
Ferdydurke	
could	be	translated
into	comprehensible	English,	and	if	so,	would	it	still	be	
Ferdydurke?	Ferdydurke
was	published	in	Poland	in	1937	and	translated	into	Spanish	in	1947	in	Buenos
Aires,	the	result	of	a	collaboration	between	Gombrowicz	and	his	Hispanic
literary	friends.	In	the	early	1960s	it	was	translated	into	French	and	German.	An
English	version	was	derived	from	the	French,	German,	and	possibly	the	Spanish
translations,	but	some	of	the	most	beautiful	and	important	passages	were
omitted.	This	is	the	first	unabridged	English	translation,	and	it	is	taken	directly
from	Gombrowicz's	original	text.	I	hope	that	it	will	establish	that	it	is	possible	to
translate	
Ferdydurke,	
at	least	for	the	most	part.
I	arrived	at	the	task	of	translating	
Ferdydurkeby	
a	circuitous	route.	I	was	born	in
Poland,	and	my	mother	tongue	is	the	language	in	which	Gombrowicz	was
creating	his	works	and	on	which	he	was	already	exerting	an	influence.	I	began	to
learn	English	at	the	age	of	thirteen	when,	as	a	refugee	during	World	War	II,	I
found	myself	living	in	England	and	Ireland.	I	settled	in	the	United	States	in	1959
and	began,	some	years	later,	to	write	short	stories	in	English—rather
idiosyncratic	in	content	and	style—and	discovered	an	affinity	with
Gombrowicz's	writing.	After	reading	Gombrowicz's	last	novel,	
Cosmos,	
in
Polish,	I	thought	that	it	would	sound	beautiful	in	English.	I	translated	the	first
chapter	of	
Cosmos,	
as	well	as	some	of	Gombrowicz's	short	stories,	and	began	to
explore	the	possibilities	of	having	them	published.	This	brought	me	into	contact
with	publishers	and	scholars,	and	with	Gombrowicz's	widow,	Rita	Gombrowicz.
They	all	encouraged	me	to	translate	
Ferdydurke,	
Gombrowicz's	first	major	work.
I	decided	at	the	outset	to	use	American	rather	than	British	English	because	it	is
less	formal	and	therefore	better	suited	to	Gombrowicz's	style.	My	own	English	is
influenced	by	my	having	learned	it	in	London	and	Dublin.	For	this	reason,	and
also	because	the	translation	was	going	to	be	from	a	native	language	to	an
acquired	one,	it	became	apparent	that	I	would	need	the	assistance	of	a	born
speaker	of	American	English.	My	husband's	reviews	of	the	many	drafts	proved
to	be	most	useful	in	this	respect.	In	some	instances,	however,	when	he	would
interject,	"But	we	don't	say	it	this	way,"	my	reply	would	be,	"In	Polish	we	don't
either;	it's	pure	Gombrowicz"—and	this	would	be	the	final	court	of	appeal.
Clearly	I	was	dealing	with	yet	another	language:	Gombrowicz's	Polish.
Gombrowicz	had	availed	himself	of	four	idioms:	colloquial	Polish;	literary
Polish;	the	language	of	the	intelligentsia	and	the	landed	gentry;	and	the	languageof	the	peasantry.	But	he	also	introduced	his	own	idiosyncrasies	by	playing	
with
and	
on	
words,	by	changing	nouns	into	verbs	and	adjectives,	by	using	unusual
phraseology,	and	by	inventing	new	forms,	some	of	which	have	entered
colloquial	Polish.	Had	I	not	worked	as	a	psychiatrist	with	English speaking
schizophrenics	who	invent	their	own	languages,	I	may	not	have	felt	comfortable
"neologizing"	English	in	such	crucial	words	and	phrases	as	"proffed"	and	"he
had	dealt	me	the	
pupa"	
The	Polish	word	
pupa	
(pronounced	"poopa")	presented	a
special	problem.	It	means	the	buttocks,	behind,	bum,	tush,	rump,	but	not	one	of
these	(nor	any	others	that	I	considered)	adequately	conveys	the	sense	in	which
Gombrowicz	uses	"pupa"	in	the	text.	While	the	"mug"	is	Gombrowicz's
metaphor	for	the	destructive	elements	in	human	relationships,	the	pupa	is	his
metaphor	for	the	gentle,	insidious,	but	definite	infantilizing	and	humiliation	that
we	inflict	on	one	another.	We	made	the	decision	to	stay	with	the	Polish	word.
Ferdydurke	
is	a	tragi farce,	in	which	events	are	often	tragic	and	comic	at	the
same	time,	and	in	which	the	mug	and	the	pupa	are	the	metaphors	for	violence
and	belittlement.	Names	of	body	parts	are	given	meaning	beyond	the	usual,	often
through	wordplay.	This	wordplay	is,	whenever	possible,	translated	literally.
Some	plays	on	words	are	impossible	to	translate—for	example,	Gombrowicz
uses	the	fact	that	the	Polish	term	for	fingers	and	toes	is	same	word	to	create
wordplay	between	"fingers"	and	"tiptoeing."
I	had	to	bear	in	mind	that	in	English	the	sequence	of	words	is	crucial	to	meaning,
whereas	in	Polish	there	is	a	more	complicated	grammar	that	clarifies	the
meaning	of	a	sentence.	Mishaps	such	as	"he	threw	his	mother	from	the	train	a
kiss"	do	not	occur	in	Polish.
Gombrowicz	delighted,	it	seems,	in	compressing	the	abstract	into	the	concrete:	it
is	not	the	thought	of	the	farmhand	but	the	farmhand	himself	that	"paints	the
morning	in	bright	and	pleasant	colors,"	or,	"she	was	generally	a	bit	disgusted
with	mother,"	instead	of	"mothering."
Gombrowicz's	long	sentences	and	paragraphs,	frequent	use	of	dashes,	and	his
grouping	of	entire	conversations	into	single	paragraphs	were	part	of	his	style,
and	I	preserved	these.	The	same	applies	to	his	repeating	a	word	rather	than
providing	its	synonym;	by	doing	so	he	evokes	a	sense	of	emphasis	and	rhythm.
I	was	equally	faithful	to	Gombrowicz's	changes	of	tense	between	past	and
present	in	the	same	paragraph	and	even	in	the	same	sentence.	The
metamorphosis	of	a	thirty year old	man	into	a	teenager	is	often	indicated	by	past
tense	becoming	present.	Also,	the	change	of	tense	imbues	the	story	with	asurreal	sense	of	time.
In	translating	idioms	I	sometimes	had	to	use	an	English	one	that	had	the	same
meaning	as	the	Polish	but	was	entirely	different.	For	
z	palca—
"from	the
finger"—I	substituted	"out	of	thin	air."	However,	the	English	idiom	"the	end
justifies	the	means"	was	changed	to	"the	end	sanctifies	the	means,"	preserving	a
nuance	of	the	Polish.
In	Polish,	the	use	of	diminutives	imparts,	in	many	instances,	an	aura	of
affectation	and	artificiality,	and	they	often	sound	ridiculous.	Gombrowicz	spared
no	effort	in	pointing	this	out	by	his	frequent	and	exaggerated	use	of	diminutives.
I	have	tried	to	capture	this	with	diminutive	adjectives,	as	in	"cute	little	head,"	or
by	using	the	ending	" ie."
In	Poland,	French	was	not	the	language	of	the	aristocracy,	as	it	had	been	in
Russia	until	the	early	1800s,	but	the	occasional	use	of	French	and	other
languages	was,	nonetheless,	a	common	affectation	and	a	fruitful	field	for
Gombrowicz's	satire.	I	have	followed	Gombrowicz	in	not	offering	a	translation
of	familiar	foreign	words	and	phrases.
Two	important	names—Kneadus	(from	the	verb	"to	knead")	and	Youngblood—
were	translated	into	English	because	they	have	definite	connotations	in	Polish
that	contribute	to	the	meaning	of	the	tale.	The	title	itself,	
Ferdydurke,	
has	no
meaning	in	Polish,	although	there	is	some	conjecture	that	the	word	was	a
contraction	and	alteration	of	the	name	Freddy	Durkee,	the	chief	character	in
Sinclair	Lewis's	
Babbitt,	
which	was	widely	read	in	Poland	in	the	early	1930s.
Gombrowicz	himself	never	explained	the	title.
Gombrowicz	has	presented	us	with	a	remarkable	novel	in	a	bold	and	innovative
style—with	élan,	humor,	beauty.	No	translation	is	final,	but	it	was	incumbent	on
me	to	make	a	valiant	effort	to	transfer	the	original	text	to	the	English speaking
reader	with	fidelity	and	with	the	verve	inherent	in	the	original;	my	guiding
principle	was	to	approach	Gombrowicz	with	humility	and	the	reader	with
audacity.
The	following	texts	were	used	in	this	translation.
Witold	Gombrowicz,	
Ferdydurke	
(Paris:	Institut	Littéraire,	1969).	Includes
changes	by	Gombrowicz.
Gombrowicz,	
Ferdydurke,	
translated	into	English	by	Eric	Mosbacher	(London,
1961).
Gombrowicz,	
Ferdydurke,	
translated	into	French	by	George	Sédir	(Paris,	1973).
Gombrowicz,	
Ferdydurke,	
translated	into	Spanish,	based	on	1947	translation(Buenos	Aires,	1964).
Gombrowicz,	
Polish	Reminiscences	and	Travels	Through	Argentina	
(in	Polish).
Gombrowicz,	
Diary	
(in	Polish).
Michal	Glowihski,	
Witold	Gombrowicz's	"Ferdydurke"	
(in	Polish).Acknowledgments
It	is	my	pleasure	to	acknowledge	the	unfailing	support	of	Professor	Stanislaw
Baranczak	in	this	difficult	and	challenging	endeavor.	Coming	from	such	an
esteemed	translator,	it	meant	a	great	deal	to	me.	When	I	cried	to	high	heaven	for
succor,	he	always	gave	me	encouragement	and	valuable	suggestions.
My	gratitude	also	goes	out	to	my	husband,	Thom	Lane,	whose	familiarity	with
American	colloquial	English	and	slang,	as	well	as	his	wide	reading	of	European
literature,	were	of	great	assistance	to	me.	He	also	helped	me	clarify	complex
passages	through	his	mindful	reading	of	my	translation	drafts.
I	also	want	to	thank	Dr.	Richard	Fenigsen	for	his	careful	verification	of	my
translation	from	the	Polish,	and	for	his	helpful	remarks.
No	less	appreciation	is	due	my	family,	friends,	and	colleagues	for	their	support
during	the	long	process	of	the	translation,	and	for	their	comments.
And,	last	but	not	least,	I	want	to	thank	Jonathan	Brent	of	Yale	University	Press
for	his	willingness	to	let	this	work	reach	the	light	of	day.
D.B.1	Abduction
Tuesday	morning	I	awoke	at	that	pale	and	lifeless	hour	when	night	is	almost
gone	but	dawn	has	not	yet	come	into	its	own.	Awakened	suddenly,	I	wanted	to
take	a	taxi	and	dash	to	the	railroad	station,	thinking	I	was	due	to	leave,	when,	in
the	next	minute,	I	realized	to	my	chagrin	that	no	train	was	waiting	for	me	at	the
station,	that	no	hour	had	struck.	I	lay	in	the	murky	light	while	my	body,
unbearably	frightened,	crushed	my	spirit	with	fear,	and	my	spirit	crushed	my
body,	whose	tiniest	fibers	cringed	in	apprehension	that	nothing	would	ever
happen,	nothing	ever	change,	that	nothing	would	ever	come	to	pass,	and
whatever	I	undertook,	nothing,	but	nothing,	would	ever	come	of	it.	It	was	the
dread	of	nonexistence,	the	terror	of	extinction,	it	was	the	angst	of	nonlife,	the
fear	of	unreality,	a	biological	scream	of	all	my	cells	in	the	face	of	an	inner
disintegration	when	all	would	be	blown	to	pieces	and	scattered	to	the	winds.	It
was	the	fear	of	unseemly	pettiness	and	mediocrity,	the	fright	of	distraction,	panic
at	fragmentation,	the	dread	of	rape	from	within	and	of	rape	that	was	threatening
me	from	without—but	most	important,	there	was	something	on	my	heels	at	all
times,	something	that	I	would	call	a	sense	of	inner,	intermolecular	mockery	and
derision,	an	inbred	superlaugh	of	my	bodily	parts	and	the	analogous	parts	of	my
spirit,	all	running	wild.
The	fear	had	been	generated	by	a	dream	that	plagued	me	through	the	night,	and
finally	woke	me.	The	dream	took	me	back	to	my	youth,	a	reversal	in	time	that
should	be	forbidden	to	nature,	and	I	saw	myself	as	I	was	at	fifteen	or	sixteen,
standing	on	a	rock	near	a	mill	by	a	river,	my	face	to	the	wind,	and	I	heard	myself
saying	something,	I	heard	my	long buried,	roosterlike	squeaky	little	voice,	I	saw
my	features	that	were	not	yet	fully	formed,	my	nose	that	was	too	small,	my
hands	that	were	too	large—I	felt	the	unpleasant	texture	of	that	intermediate,
passing	phase	of	development.	I	woke	up	laughing	and	terrified	both,	because	I
thought	that	the	thirty year old	man	I	am	today	was	aping	and	ridiculing	the
callow	juvenile	I	once	was,	while	he	in	turn	was	aping	me	and,	by	the	same
token,	each	of	us	was	aping	himself.	Oh,	wretched	memory	that	compels	us	to
remember	the	paths	we	took	to	arrive	at	the	present	state	of	affairs!	Further:	as	I
lay	awake	but	still	half	dreaming,	I	felt	that	my	body	was	not	homogeneous,	that
some	parts	were	still	those	of	a	boy,	and	that	my	head	was	laughing	at	my	leg
and	ridiculing	it,	that	my	leg	was	laughing	at	my	head,	that	my	finger	was
poking	fun	at	my	heart,	my	heart	at	my	brain,	that	my	nose	was	thumbing	itself
at	my	eye,	my	eye	chuckling	and	bellowing	at	my	nose—and	all	my	parts	werewildly	raping	each	other	in	an	all encompassing	and	piercing	state	of	pan 
mockery.	Nor	did	my	fear	lessen	one	iota	when	I	reached	full	consciousness	and
began	reflecting	on	my	life.	On	the	contrary,	it	intensified	even	as	it	was
interrupted	(or	accentuated)	by	a	giggle	my	mouth	could	not	hold	back.	I	was
halfway	down	the	path	of	my	life	when	I	found	myself	in	a	dark	forest.	But	this
forest,	worse	luck,	was	g	r	e	e	n.
For	in	my	waking	life	I	was	just	as	unsettled	and	torn	apart—as	in	the	dream.	I
had	recently	crossed	the	unavoidable	Rubicon	of	thirty,	I	had	passed	that
milestone	and,	according	to	my	birth	certificate	and	to	all	appearances,	I	was	a
mature	human	being,	and	yet	I	wasn't—what	was	I	then?	A	thirty year old	bridge
player?	Someone	who	happened	to	be	working,	attending	to	life's	trivia,	meeting
deadlines?	What	was	my	status?	I	frequented	bars	and	cafés	where	I	exchanged	a
few	words,	occasionally	even	ideas,	with	people	I	ran	into,	but	my	status	was	not
at	all	clear,	and	I	myself	did	not	know	whether	I	was	a	mature	man	or	a	green
youth;	at	this	turning	point	of	my	life	I	was	neither	this	nor	that—I	was	nothing
—and	my	contemporaries,	already	married	and	established,	if	not	in	their	views
on	life,	at	least	at	various	government	agencies,	treated	me	with	understandable
mistrust.	My	aunts,	those	numerous	quarter mothers,	tacked on,	patched on,
though	they	loved	me	dearly,	had	long	been	urging	me	to	settle	down	and	be
somebody,	a	lawyer,	or	a	civil	servant—they	seemed	exceedingly	irked	by	my
vagueness,	and,	not	knowing	what	to	make	of	me,	they	didn't	know	how	to	talk
to	me,	so	they	just	babbled.
"Joey,"	they	would	say	between	one	babble	and	another,	"it's	high	time,	dear
child.	What	will	people	say?	If	you	don't	want	to	be	a	doctor,	at	least	be	a
womanizer,	or	a	fancier	of	horses,	be	something	...	be	something	definite	..."
And	I	heard	them	whispering	to	one	another	that	I	was	socially	awkward,
inexperienced,	and,	as	they	wearied	of	the	blank	that	I	was	creating	in	their
heads,	they	would	resume	their	babbling.	True,	this	state	of	affairs	could	not
continue	indefinitely.	The	hands	on	nature's	clock	move	relentlessly,	inexorably.
When	I	cut	my	last	teeth,	my	wisdom	teeth,	my	development	was	supposed	to	be
complete,	and	it	was	time	for	the	inevitable	kill,	for	the	man	to	kill	the
inconsolable	little	boy,	to	emerge	like	a	butterfly	and	leave	behind	the	remains	of
the	chrysalis	that	had	spent	itself.	I	was	supposed	to	lift	myself	out	of	mists	and
chaos,	out	of	murky	swamps,	out	of	swirls	and	roars,	out	of	reeds	and	rushes,	out
of	the	croaking	of	frogs,	and	emerge	among	clear	and	crystallized	forms:	run	a
comb	through	my	hair,	tidy	up	my	affairs,	enter	the	social	life	of	adults	and
deliberate	with	them.Oh,	sure!	But	I	had	already	given	it	a	try,	I	had	already	made	that	effort,	yet	I
could	only	shake	with	laughter	at	the	results.	And	therefore,	to	make	myself
presentable,	my	hair	neatly	combed,	and	to	explain	myself	as	best	I	could,	I	set
out	to	write	a	book—strange	that	I	should	think	my	entrance	into	the	world
needed	an	explanation,	even	though	no	one	has	yet	seen	an	explanation	that	was
anything	but	obfuscation.	I	wished,	first	of	all,	to	buy	my	way	into	people's	good
graces	with	my	book	so	that,	in	subsequent	personal	contact,	I	would	find	the
ground	already	prepared,	and,	I	reasoned,	if	I	succeeded	in	implanting	in	their
souls	a	favorable	image	of	me,	this	image	would	in	turn	shape	me;	and	so,	willy 
nilly,	I	would	become	mature.	So	why	did	my	pen	betray	me?	Why	did	holy
shame	forbid	me	to	write	a	notoriously	trivial	novel?	Instead	of	spinning	lofty
themes	from	the	heart,	from	the	soul,	I	spun	my	themes	from	more	lowly
quarters	and	filled	my	narrative	with	legs,	frogs,	with	material	that	was	immature
and	fermenting,	and,	having	set	it	all	apart	on	the	page	by	style,	by	voice,	by	a
tone	that	was	cold	and	self possessed,	I	indicated	that	I	wished,	herewith,	to	part
ways	with	those	ferments.	Why	did	I,	as	if	thwarting	my	own	purpose,	entitle	my
book	
Memoirs	from	the	Time	of	Immaturity?
{1}
	In	vain	my	friends	advised	me
against	using	such	a	tide,	saying	that	I	should	avoid	even	the	slightest	allusion	to
immaturity.	"Don't	do	it,"	they	said,	"the	concept	of	immaturity	is	too	drastic,	if
you	think	of	yourself	as	immature,	who	will	think	of	you	as	mature?	Don't	you
understand	that	first	and	foremost	you	must	think	of	yourself	as	mature,
otherwise—nothing	doing?"	Yet	it	just	didn't	seem	appropriate	to	dismiss,	easily
and	glibly,	the	sniveling	brat	within	me,	I	thought	that	the	truly	Adult	were
sufficiently	sharp	and	clear sighted	to	see	through	this,	and	that	anyone
incessantly	pursued	by	the	brat	within	had	no	business	appearing	in	public
without	the	brat.	But	perhaps	I	took	the	serious minded	too	seriously	and
overestimated	the	maturity	of	the	mature.	Memories,	memories!	My	head	tucked
under	my	pillow,	my	legs	under	the	covers,	tossing	about	between	fear	and
laughter,	I	took	stock	of	my	entrance	into	the	adult	world.	There	is	too	much
silence	about	the	personal,	inner	hurts	and	injuries	inflicted	by	that	entrance,	the
grave	consequences	of	which	remain	with	us	forever.	Men	of	letters,	those	men
who	have	a	God given	talent	to	write	on	the	subject	of	such	remote	and
indifferent	matters	as,	for	example,	the	grief	in	the	soul	of	Emperor	Charles	II
caused	by	Brunhilde's	marriage,	shudder	at	the	thought	of	mentioning	the	most
important	issue—their	metamorphosis	into	a	public	and	social	being.	They
prefer,	it	seems,	to	have	everyone	think	of	them	as	writers	inspired	by	the	grace
of	God,	not	man,	and	to	imagine	that	they	have	dropped	from	the	sky,	talent	andall;	they	are	too	embarrassed	to	shed	any	light	on	the	concessions	they	had	to
make	as	individuals,	on	the	personal	defeats	they	had	to	endure	in	order	to
acquire	the	right	to	expound	on	Brunhilde	or,	for	that	matter,	on	the	lives	of
beekeepers.	No,	not	a	word	about	their	own	lives—only	about	the	lives	of
beekeepers.	Indeed,	having	produced	twenty	books	on	the	lives	of	beekeepers,
one	can	be	immortalized—but	what	is	the	connection,	where	is	the	bond
between	the	king	of	beekeepers	and	the	inner	man,	between	the	man	and	the
youth,	between	the	youth	and	the	boy,	the	boy	and	the	child	that,	after	all,	he
once	was,	what	comfort	is	the	king	to	the	little	brat	in	you?	A	life	unmindful	of
these	bonds,	a	life	that	does	not	evolve	in	unbroken	continuity	from	one	phase	to
another	is	like	a	house	that	is	being	built	from	the	top	down,	and	must	inevitably
end	in	a	schizophrenic	split	of	the	inner	self.
Memories!	Mankind	is	accursed	because	our	existence	on	this	earth	does	not
tolerate	any	well defined	and	stable	hierarchy,	everything	continually	flows,
spills	over,	moves	on,	everyone	must	be	aware	of	and	be	judged	by	everyone
else,	and	the	opinions	that	the	ignorant,	dull,	and	slow witted	hold	about	us	are
no	less	important	than	the	opinions	of	the	bright,	the	enlightened,	the	refined.
This	is	because	man	is	profoundly	dependent	on	the	reflection	of	himself	in
another	man's	soul,	be	it	even	the	soul	of	an	idiot.	I	absolutely	disagree	with	my
fellow	writers	who	treat	the	opinions	of	the	dull witted	with	an	aristocratic
haughtiness	and	declare:	
odi	profanum	vulgus.	
What	a	cheap	and	simplistic	way
of	avoiding	reality,	what	a	shoddy	escape	into	specious	loftiness!	I	maintain,	on
the	contrary,	that	the	more	dull	and	narrow minded	they	are,	the	more	urgent	and
compelling	are	their	opinions,	just	as	an	ill fitting	shoe	hurts	us	more	than	a
well fitting	one.	Oh,	those	judgments,	the	bottomless	pit	of	people's	judgments
and	opinions	about	your	wisdom,	feelings,	and	character,	about	all	the	details	of
your	personality—it's	a	pit	that	opens	up	before	the	daredevil	who	drapes	his
thoughts	in	print	and	lets	them	loose	on	paper,	oh,	printed	paper,	paper,	paper!
And	I'm	not	even	talking	about	the	heartfelt	opinions	so	fondly	held	by	our
aunts,	no,	I	mean	the	opinions	of	those	other	aunts—the	cultural	aunts,	those
female	semi writers	and	tacked on	semi critics	who	make	pronouncements	in
literary	magazines.	Indeed,	world	culture	has	been	beset	by	a	flock	of
superfluous	hens	patched on,	pinned on,	to	literature,	who	have	become	finely
tuned	to	spiritual	values	and	well	versed	in	aesthetics,	frequently	entertaining
views	and	opinions	of	their	own,	who	have	even	caught	on	to	the	notions	that
Oscar	Wilde	is	passé	and	that	Bernard	Shaw	is	a	master	of	paradox.	Oh,	they	are
on	to	the	fact	that	they	must	be	independent,	profound,	unobtrusively	assertive,and	filled	with	auntie	kindliness.	Auntie,	auntie,	auntie!	Unless	you	have	ever
found	yourself	in	the	laboratory	of	a	cultural	aunt	and	been	dissected,	mute	and
without	a	groan,	by	her	trivializing	mentality	that	turns	all	life	lifeless,	unless
you	have	ever	seen	an	auntie's	critique	of	yourself	in	a	newspaper,	you	have	no
concept	of	triviality,	and	auntie triviality	in	particular.
Further,	let	us	consider	the	opinions	of	men	and	women	of	the	landed	gentry,	the
opinions	of	schoolgirls,	the	narrow minded	opinions	of	minor	office	clerks,	the
bureaucratic	opinions	of	high	officials,	the	opinions	of	lawyers	in	the	provinces,
the	hyperbolic	opinions	of	students,	the	arrogant	opinions	of	little	old	men,	and
the	opinions	of	journalists,	the	opinions	of	social	activists	as	well	as	the	opinions
of	doctors'	wives,	and,	finally,	the	opinions	of	children	listening	to	their	parents'
opinions,	the	opinions	of	underling	chambermaids	and	of	cooks,	the	opinions	of
our	female	cousins,	the	opinions	of	schoolgirls—a	whole	ocean	of	opinions,
each	one	defining	you	within	someone	else,	and	creating	you	in	another	man's
soul.	It's	as	if	you	were	being	born	inside	a	thousand	souls	that	are	too	tight 
fitting	for	comfort!	But	my	situation	was	even	more	thorny	and	complex,	just	as
my	book	was	more	thorny	and	complex	than	the	conventionally	mature	reading
matter.	It	brought	me,	to	be	sure,	an	array	of	fine	friends,	and,	if	only	those
cultural	aunts	and	other	members	of	the	populace	could	hear	how	splendidly	I
was	feted	in	a	small	circle	that	was	closed	to	them	and	not	accessible	even	to
their	aspirations,	a	circle	of	the	Esteemed	and	the	Splendiferous,	and	how,	at
those	lofty	heights,	I	carried	on	intellectual	conversations,	they	would	fall
prostrate	before	me	and	lick	my	boots.	Yet	there	must	have	been	something
immature	in	my	book,	something	that	encouraged	undue	intimacy	and	attracted
those	transitory	individuals	who	were	neither	fish	nor	fowl,	that	most	awful
stratum	of	semi intelligentsia—as	if	the	time	of	immaturity	had	lured	the
demimonde	of	culture.	It	is	conceivable	that	my	book,	too	subtle	for	dullards,
was	at	the	same	time	not	sufficiently	lofty	or	puffed	up	for	the	rabble	who
respond	solely	to	the	outer	trappings	of	what	is	important.	And,	as	so	often
happened,	I	would	leave	one	of	those	hallowed	and	esteemed	places	where	I	had
just	been	pleasantly	and	reverently	celebrated,	to	be	faced,	in	the	street,	by	some
engineer's	wife	or	a	schoolgirl	who	would	unceremoniously	treat	me	like	one	of
her	own,	like	an	immature	kinsman	or	fellow	traveler,	slap	me	on	the	back	and
exclaim:	"Hello,	Joey,	you	silly,	you're,	you're—immature!"	And	so	I	seemed
wise	to	some,	silly	to	others,	notable	to	some,	hardly	noticed	by	others,
commonplace	to	some,	aristocratic	to	others.	Spread eagled	between	loftiness
and	lowliness	and	chummy	with	both,	respected	and	disparaged,	admired	anddisdained,	as	chance	or	circumstances	would	have	it!	My	life	was	torn	apart	as	it
had	never	been	in	the	quiet	days	I	spent	in	the	shelter	of	my	home.	And	I	no
longer	knew	whether	I	belonged	to	those	who	valued	me,	or	to	those	who	did
not.
But,	worse	still—hating	the	semi educated	rabble,	hating	it	with	a	vengeance,
perhaps	as	no	one	has	ever	hated	it	before—I	played	into	their	hands;	I	shunned
the	elite	and	the	aristocracy,	and	flew	from	their	friendly	and	open	arms	into	the
boorish	paws	of	those	who	considered	me	a	juvenile.	How	one	organizes	oneself
and	toward	what	one	directs	oneself	is	actually	of	primary	importance	and
crucial	to	one's	development—in	actions,	for	example,	in	speech	and	twaddle,	in
one's	writing—whether	one	directs	oneself	solely	toward	those	who	are	mature
and	fully	evolved,	toward	a	world	of	crystal clear	ideas,	or	whether	one	lets
oneself	be	constantly	plagued	by	the	specter	of	the	rabble,	of	immaturity,	of
schoolboys	and	schoolgirls,	of	gentry	and	peasantry,	of	cultural	aunts,	of
journalists	and	columnists,	by	the	specter	of	the	shady,	murky	demimonde	that
lies	in	wait	to	slowly	entwine	you	in	the	green	of	its	creepers,	lianas,	and	other
African	plants.	Not	for	one	moment	could	I	forget	the	little	not quite	world	of
the	not quite human,	and	yet,	terrified	and	disgusted	as	I	was	and	shuddering	at
the	very	thought	of	that	swampy	green,	I	could	not	tear	myself	away	from	it,
mesmerized	by	it	like	a	little	birdie	by	a	snake.	As	if	some	demon	were	tempting
me	with	immaturity!	As	if	I	were	favoring,	against	my	very	nature,	the	lower
class	and	loving	it—because	it	held	me	captive	as	a	juvenile.	Even	if	I	strained
all	my	faculties	I	would	not	have	been	able	to	speak	with	intelligence,	not	even
for	a	moment,	because	I	knew	that	somewhere	in	the	provinces	a	doctor	would
think	that	I	was	silly	anyway,	and	would	expect	nothing	of	me	but	silliness;	and	I
could	not	be	on	my	best	behavior,	nor	comport	myself	decendy	in	social
situations,	because	I	knew	that	schoolgirls,	someplace,	expected	nothing	of	me
but	indecencies.	Truly,	in	the	world	of	the	spirit,	rape	is	the	order	of	the	day,	we
are	forced	to	be	as	others	see	us,	and	to	manifest	ourselves	through	them,	we	are
not	autonomous,	and	what's	more—my	personal	calamity	came	from	an
unhealthy	delight	in	actually	making	myself	dependent	on	green	youths,
juveniles,	teenage	girls,	and	cultural	aunts.	To	have	that	cultural	aunt	forever	on
your	back—to	be	naive	because	someone	who	is	naive	thinks	you	are	naive—to
be	silly	because	some	silly	person	thinks	you	are	silly—to	be	green	because
someone	who	is	immature	dunks	and	bathes	you	in	greenness	of	his	own—
indeed,	that	could	drive	you	crazy,	were	it	not	for	the	little	word	"indeed,"	which
somehow	lets	you	go	on	living!	To	brush	against	a	higher	and	more	maturerealm	and	yet	be	unable	to	penetrate	it,	to	be	but	a	step	from	refinement,
elegance,	wisdom,	dignity,	from	mature	judgments	and	mutual	respect,	from
hierarchy	and	acknowledged	values,	and	yet	to	merely	lick	those	sweetmeats
through	the	shop	window,	and	have	no	access	to	these	matters,	to	be
superfluous?	To	associate	with	adults	and	still	imagine,	as	at	sixteen,	that	you	are
merely	pretending	to	be	an	adult?	To	pretend	you're	a	writer,	a	man	of	letters,	to
parody	literary	style	and	mature,	fanciful	phrases?	To	join	publicly,	as	an	artist,
the	merciless	fray	for	the	survival	of	your	true	"self,"	while	at	the	same	time
covertly	siding	with	your	enemies?
Ah	yes,	at	the	outset	of	my	public	life	I	did	receive	a	less than glorious
consecration,	and	I	was	duly	anointed	by	the	lower	class.	Yet	what	complicated
matters	even	more	was	the	fact	that	my	social	demeanor	left	much	to	be	desired,
I	was	fumbling	along,	inadequate	and	helpless	in	relation	to	those	semi brilliant
men	of	the	world.	My	awkwardness,	stemming	from	contrariness,	or	perhaps
from	anxiety,	would	not	let	me	identify	myself	with	any	aspect	of	maturity,	and,
out	of	sheer	panic,	I	would	quite	often	pinch	the	very	person	whose	spirit
reached	out	to	my	spirit	with	approval.	I	envied	those	literary	men,	exalted	and
predestined	to	higher	things	from	the	cradle,	whose	Soul—its	backside	prodded
with	an	awl—strove	continually	upward;	those	writers	who	in	their	Soul	took
themselves	seriously,	and	who,	with	inborn	ease	and	in	great	creative	torment,
dealt	with	matters	so	high	and	mighty	and	forever	hallowed	that	God	himself
would	have	seemed	to	them	commonplace	and	less	than	noble.	Why	isn't
everyone	called	to	write	yet	another	novel	about	love	or	to	tear	apart,	in	pain	and
suffering,	some	social	ill	or	other,	and	become	the	Champion	of	the	oppressed?
Or	to	write	poems,	and	become	the	Poet	who	believes	in	the	"glorious	future	of
poetry"?	To	be	talented,	and	with	one's	spirit	to	lift	and	nourish	the	wide	masses
of	un talented	spirits?	Yet	what	pleasure	is	there	in	agonizing	and	tormenting
oneself,	in	burning	on	the	altar	of	self sacrifice,	be	it	in	the	realm	of	the	high	and
the	sublime	and—the	mature?	To	live	vicariously	through	thousand year old
cultural	institutions	as	securely	as	if	one	were	setting	aside	a	little	sum	in	a
savings	account—this	could	be	one's	own,	as	well	as	other	people's,	fulfillment.
But	I	was,	alas,	a	juvenile,	and	juvenility	was	my	only	cultural	institution.
Caught	and	held	back	twice—first	by	my	childish	past,	which	I	could	not	forget,
and	the	second	time	by	the	childishness	of	other	people's	notions	of	me,	a
caricature	that	had	sunk	into	their	souls—I	was	the	melancholy	prisoner	of	all
that	is	green,	why,	an	insect	in	a	deep,	dense	thicket.
A	rather	unpleasant	and,	what's	more,	a	dangerous	situation.	For	there	is	nothingthat	the	Mature	hate	more,	there	is	nothing	that	disgusts	them	more,	than
immaturity.	They	will	tolerate	the	most	rabid	destructiveness	as	long	as	it
happens	within	the	confines	of	maturity,	they	are	not	threatened	by	the
revolutionary	who	fights	one	mature	ideal	with	another	mature	ideal	and
abolishes	Monarchy	in	favor	of	the	Republic,	nor	by	one	who	nibbles	at	the
Republic	and	then	devours	it	with	Monarchy.	Indeed,	it	gives	them	pleasure	to
watch	the	thriving	business	of	maturity	and	of	all	that	is	sublime.	However,	let
them	as	much	as	sniff	immaturity,	let	them	sniff	a	juvenile	or	a	sniveling	brat	in
someone	and	they	will	pounce	on	him	and,	like	swans	that	peck	a	duck	to	death,
they	will	kill	him	with	sarcasm,	derision,	and	mockery,	they	will	not	allow	a
foundling	from	the	world	that	they	have	renounced	long	ago	to	befoul	their	nest.
And	how	will	it	all	end?	Where	will	this	road	take	me?	How	did	I	become
imprisoned	in	my	own	underdevelopment,	I	wondered,	where	did	my	infatuation
with	all	the	greenness	have	its	origins—is	it	because	I	come	from	a	country	rife
with	uncouth,	mediocre,	transitory	individuals	who	feel	awkward	in	a	starched
collar,	where	it	is	not	Melancholy	and	Destiny	but	rather	Duffer	and	Fumbler
who	moon	about	the	fields	in	lamentation?	Or	is	it	because	I've	lived	in	an	era
that,	every	five	minutes,	emits	new	fads	and	slogans,	and,	at	the	slightest
opportunity,	grimaces	convulsively—a	transitory	era?...	A	pale	dawn	was
seeping	in	below	the	half open	window	shade	and,	as	I	was	thus	taking	stock	of
my	life,	I	blushed	and	shook	with	an	obscene	little	laugh	between	my	bed	sheets
—and	I	began	to	explode	with	an	impotent,	bestial,	mechanical,	knee jerk	kind
of	laughter,	as	if	someone	were	tickling	my	foot,	as	if	it	were	not	my	face	but	my
leg	that	was	giggling.	It	was	high	time	to	put	an	end	to	it,	cut	the	ties	with	my
childhood,	make	a	decision	and	start	anew—do	something!	Forget	at	last,	forget
the	schoolgirls!	Dismiss	the	fondness	of	cultural	aunts	and	peasant	girls,	forget
the	minor	and	pretentious	office	clerks,	forget	about	the	leg	and	my	heinous	past,
snub	the	sniveling	brat	and	the	juvenile—settle	myself	squarely	on	mature	turf,
and	yes,	finally	assume	that	extremely	aristocratic	stance	and	despise,	despise!
No	longer	stimulate,	titillate,	and	attract	the	immaturity	of	others	with
immaturity,	as	I	have	done	thus	far,	but,	on	the	contrary,	elicit	my	own	maturity
and	with	it	evoke	their	maturity,	speak	from	my	soul	to	their	soul!	The	soul?	And
forget	the	leg?	The	soul?	How	about	the	leg?	How	can	one	forget	the	legs	of
cultural	aunts?	And	what	if,	no	matter	how	hard	I	try,	I	do	not	succeed	in
conquering	the	green	that	is	budding,	pulsating,	growing	all	around	(and	I'm
almost	sure	not	to	succeed),	what	if	I	treat	people	maturely	and	they	persist	in
treating	me	immaturely,	what	if	I	address	them	with	wisdom	and	they	respondwith	stupidity?	No,	no,	I'd	rather	be	the	first	to	act	immaturely,	I	don't	want	to
expose	my	wisdom	to	their	stupidity,	I'd	rather	direct	my	stupidity	against	them!
And	yet	no,	no,	that's	not	what	I	want,	I'd	rather	be	at	one	with	them	because	I
love	them,	I	love	the	little	buds	and	sprouts,	the	little	sprigs	of	green,	oh!—and
all	at	once	I	felt	them	grabbing	me	again,	catching	me	in	their	love	embrace,	and
again	I	roared	with	that	mechanical,	knee jerk	laughter	and	sang	a	frivolous	little
ditty:
In	the	town	of	Little	Zanich	In	the	bedroom	of	Miss	Bozek	Hid	two	bandits	in	a
closet	...	when	suddenly	the	taste	in	my	mouth	turned	bitter,	my	throat	went	dry
—I	realized	that	I	was	not	alone.	There	was	someone	else	in	the	room,	in	the
corner	by	the	stove	where	it	was	still	dark—another	person	was	there.
But	the	door	was	locked.	Not	a	person	then,	but	an	apparition.	An	apparition?
The	devil?	A	ghost?	A	dead	person?	I	suddenly	sensed	that	it	was	not	someone
dead	but	someone	alive,	and	all	at	once	my	hair	stood	on	end—I	sensed	another
human,	like	a	dog	smells	another	dog.	My	mouth	dry,	my	heart	pounding,	I	was
hardly	able	to	catch	my	breath—when	I	realized	that	it	was	I	standing	by	the
stove.	And	this	time	it	was	not	a	dream—it	really	was	my	double	standing	by	the
stove.	I	noticed	however,	that	he	was	more	scared	than	I	was;	he	stood	with	his
head	lowered,	his	eyes	downcast,	his	hands	hanging	by	his	side—and	his	fear
gave	me	courage.	I	peeked	from	under	my	covers	at	a	face	that	was	mine	and	yet
it	wasn't	mine.	It	loomed	from	a	deep	and	dark	greenness,	itself	a	brighter	green
—it	was	my	own	countenance	as	it	had	always	been.	Here	were	my	lips	.	.	.	my
ears	.	.	.	my	nose,	they	were	my	home.	Hail	familiar	nooks	and	crannies!	And
how	familiar!	How	well	I	knew	the	twist	of	those	lips	hiding	tension	and	fear.
The	corners	of	my	mouth,	my	chin,	my	ear	partially	torn	off	by	Ziggy	long	ago
—all	the	signs	and	symptoms	of	a	twofold	impact,	a	face	that	two	forces,	an
outer	and	an	inner,	had	ground	between	them.	It	was	all	mine—or	maybe	I	was	it
—or	maybe	it	was	all	someone	else's—and	yet	it	was	I.
I	suddenly	thought	that	it	was	not	I.	I	felt	like	someone	who	unexpectedly	looks
into	a	mirror	and	for	a	split	second	does	not	recognize	himself,	so	did	the
startling	concreteness	of	the	form	surprise	me	and	cut	me	to	the	quick.	The
quaint	short	hairstyle,	the	eyelids,	pants	just	like	mine,	organs	of	sight,	hearing,
and	breathing—were	these	my	organs,	was	it	really	me?	The	minute	details,	the
clarity	and	precision	of	the	outline	...	all	too	clear.	He	must	have	noticed	that	I
saw	those	details,	and,	embarrassed,	he	smiled	uneasily	and	waved	his	hand	with
a	hesitant	motion	that	seemed	to	recede	into	the	darkness.
And	yet,	as	the	light	from	the	window	grew	brighter,	his	form	became	more	andmore	vivid—his	fingers	and	fingernails	now	came	into	view—and	I	saw	.	.	.	but
the	ghost,	realizing	that	I	saw	him,	crouched	slightly	and,	not	looking	at	me,
began	to	signal	me	with	his	hand	not	to	look.	Yet	I	could	not	refrain	from
looking.	Because	that's	the	way	I	am.	Strange	indeed,	like	Mme	Pompadour.	And
unpredictable.	But	why?	An	ephemeron.	His	faults	and	blemishes	creeping	into
the	light	of	day,	he	crouched	like	one	of	those	nocturnal	animals	made	easy	prey
by	the	light—like	a	rat	caught	by	surprise	in	the	middle	of	the	room.	The	details
emerged	more	and	more	clearly,	more	and	more	horribly,	body	parts	creeping	out
of	him	everywhere,	one	by	one,	clearly	defined	and	real...	to	the	limits	of	their
disgraceful	clarity...	to	the	limits	of	disgrace	...	I	saw	his	finger,	his	fingernails,
his	nose,	his	eye,	his	thigh,	and	his	foot,	everything	was	now	out	in	the	open,
and,	as	if	hypnotized	by	all	the	details,	I	stood	up	and	took	a	step	toward	him.	He
shuddered	and	waved	his	hand	as	if	in	apology,	and	he	seemed	to	say	"that's	not
it,	never	mind—let	me	be,	forgive	me,	leave	me	alone"	...	but	my	movement,
initiated	as	just	a	warning,	ended	despicably—I	continued	to	move	toward	him,
and,	unable	to	stop	the	sweep	of	my	outstretched	hand,	I	struck	him	in	the	face.
Off	with	you!	Off!	No,	this	is	not	me	at	all!	This	is	something	randomly	thrust
upon	me,	something	alien,	an	intrusion,	a	compromise	between	the	inner	and
outer	world,	it's	not	m	y	body	at	all!	He	groaned	and—with	a	leap—he	vanished.
I	was	left	alone	but	actually	not	alone—how	could	I	be	alone	when	I	wasn't	even
there,	I	had	no	sense	of	being	there,	and	not	a	single	thought,	gesture,	action,	or
word,	in	fact	nothing	seemed	to	be	mine,	but	rather	it	was	as	if	it	had	all	been
settled	somewhere	outside	myself,	decided	for	me—because	in	reality	I	was
quite	different!	And	this	upset	me	terribly.	Oh,	to	create	my	own	form!	To	turn
outward!	To	express	myself!	Let	me	conceive	my	own	shape,	let	no	one	do	it	for
me!	My	agitation	pushes	me	toward	writing	paper.	I	pull	out	a	few	sheets	from
the	drawer,	it	is	morning	now,	sunlight	pours	into	my	room,	the	maid	brings	my
morning	coffee	and	bread	rolls	while	I	begin,	amid	shimmering	and	finely
chiseled	forms,	to	write	the	first	pages	of	my	very	own	
oeuvre,	
which	will	be	just
like	me,	identical	with	me,	the	sum	total	of	me,	an	
oeuvre	
in	which	I	will	be	free
to	expound	my	own	views	against	everything	and	everyone,	when	suddenly	the
bell	rings,	the	maid	opens	the	door,	and	T.	Pimko	appears—a	doctor	of
philosophy	and	a	professor,	in	reality	just	a	schoolteacher,	a	cultural	philologue
from	Krakôw,	short	and	slight,	skinny,	bald,	wearing	spectacles,	pinstriped
trousers,	a	jacket,	yellow	buckskin	shoes,	his	fingernails	large	and	yellow.
Do	you	know	the	Professor?	Have	you	met	the	Professor?	Professor?
Stop,	stop,	stop,	stop,	stop!	At	the	sight	of	this	horribly	banal	and	utterlycommonplace	Form	I	threw	myself	on	my	texts,	covering	them	with	my	whole
body,	but	he	sat	down,	so	I	too	had	to	sit	down,	and	having	sat	down	he
proceeded	to	offer	me	his	condolences	on	the	death	of	my	aunt,	who	died	long
ago	and	whom	I	had	totally	forgotten.
"The	memory	of	the	dead,"	said	Pimko,	"is	the	ark	of	the	covenant	between	the
new	times	and	the	old,	just	like	the	songs	of	the	people	(Mickiewicz).	We	live
the	life	of	the	dead	(A.	Comte).	Your	aunt	is	dead,	and	this	is	a	good	reason,
even	a	compelling	reason,	to	extol	her	contribution	to	cultural	thought.	The
deceased	had	her	faults	(he	enumerated	them),	but	she	also	had	her	good	points
(he	enumerated	them)	which	benefited	everyone,	all	in	all	not	a	bad	book,	that	is,
I	meant	to	say	a	'C	plus'—well	then,	to	make	a	long	story	short,	the	deceased
was	a	positive	force,	my	overall	assessment	of	her	is	rather	favorable,	which	I
consider	it	my	pleasurable	duty	to	tell	you,	since	I,	Pimko,	stand	guard	of	the
cultural	values	your	aunt	undoubtedly	still	personifies,	especially	since	she's
dead.	And	besides,"	he	added	indulgently,	
"de	mortuis	nihil	nisi	bene,	
and
although	one	could	criticize	this	or	that,	why	discourage	a	young	author—I	beg
your	pardon,	a	nephew...	But	what	is	this?"	he	exclaimed	when	he	saw	my	notes
lying	on	the	table.	"Not	only	a	nephew,	but	also	an	author!	I	see	we're	trying	our
wings,	are	we?	Chirp,	chirp,	chirp,	author!	Let	me	look	it	over,	and	encourage
you	..."
And,	still	seated,	he	reached	across	the	table	for	my	papers,	put	on	his	spectacles,
all	the	while	remaining	seated.
"It's	nothing...	it's	just..."	I	mumbled,	still	in	my	seat.	My	whole	world	suddenly
collapsed,	his	talk	of	the	aunt	and	the	author	upset	me	no	end.
"Well,	well,	well,"	he	said,	"chirp,	chirp,	little	chickie."	He	wiped	one	eye	as	he
said	this,	he	then	took	out	a	cigarette	and,	holding	it	between	two	fingers	of	his
left	hand,	proceeded	to	squeeze	it	with	two	fingers	of	his	right	hand;	at	the	same
time	he	sneezed	because	the	tobacco	irritated	his	nose,	and,	still	seated,	he	began
to	read.	And	sitting	squarely	on	his	wisdom,	he	went	on	reading.	I	felt	sick	at	the
sight	of	him	reading.	My	world	collapsed	and	promptly	reset	itself	according	to
the	rules	of	a	conventional	prof.	I	could	not	pounce	on	him	because	I	was	seated,
and	I	was	seated	because	he	was	seated.	For	no	apparent	reason,	sitting	itself
assumed	prime	importance	and	became	an	obstacle	to	everything	else.	Not
knowing	what	to	do	or	how	to	behave	I	fidgeted	in	my	seat,	moved	my	leg,
looked	around	at	the	walls	and	bit	my	nails,	while	he	went	on	sitting,	logically
and	consistently,	his	seat	fairly	and	squarely	filled	with	that	of	a	prof,	reading.
This	went	on	for	a	terribly	long	time.	Minutes	weighed	on	me	like	hours,seconds	stretched	and	stretched	making	me	feel	like	someone	trying	to	drink	the
ocean	through	a	straw.	I	groaned:	"For	God's	sake,	not	your	prof	stuff	!	You're
killing	me	with	it!"	The	rigid,	angular	prof	was	indeed	killing	me.	But	he
continued	to	read	in	the	manner	of	a	true	prof,	and,	like	a	typical	prof,	he	went
on	absorbing	my	rambunctious	texts,	holding	the	paper	close	to	his	eyes,	while
outside	the	window	a	brownstone	building	stood,	twelve	windows	wide	and
twelve	windows	deep.	A	dream?!	An	apparition?	Why	had	he	come	here?	Why
was	he	sitting?	Why	was	I	sitting?	How	on	earth	was	everything	that	preceded
this—dreams,	memories,	aunts,	torments,	ghosts,	my	
oeuvre	
only	just	begun—
epitomized	now	by	this	commonplace	prof	sitting	here?	My	whole	world	shrank
into	this	trite	prof.	How	unbearable!	It	made	sense	for	him	to	keep	sitting
(because	he	was	reading),	but	it	made	no	sense	for	me	to	be	sitting.	I	strained	to
get	up,	but	just	at	that	moment	he	looked	at	me	indulgently	from	under	his
spectacles,	and	suddenly—I	became	small,	my	leg	became	a	little	leg,	my	hand	a
little	hand,	my	persona	a	little	persona,	my	being	a	little	being,	my	
oeuvre	
a	little
oeuvre,	
my	body	a	little	body,	while	he	grew	larger	and	larger,	sitting	and
glancing	at	me,	and	reading	my	manuscript	forever	and	ever	amen—	he	sat.
Do	you	know	what	it	feels	like	to	be	diminished	within	someone	else?	Oh,	to	be
diminished	within	an	aunt	is	unseemly	enough,	but	to	be	diminished	within	a
huge,	commonplace	prof	is	the	peak	of	unseemly	diminishment.	And	I	noticed
that	the	prof	was	like	a	cow	grazing	on	my	greenness.	It's	a	strange	feeling—to
see	a	prof	nibbling	at	the	green	of	your	meadow,	which	is	actually	your
apartment,	to	see	him	sitting	in	your	chair	and	reading—yet	actually	nibbling
and	grazing.	Something	terrible	was	happening	to	me,	and,	at	the	same	time,	I
was	surrounded	by	something	stupid	and	brazenly	unreal.	"A	spirit!"	I
exclaimed,	"That's	me,	a	spirit!	Not	a	little	author!	A	spirit!
A	living	spirit!	That's	me!"	But	he	just	went	on	sitting,	sitting,	and	sitting,	stuck
to	his	seat—an	act	of	sheer	stupidity—yet	incredibly	powerful.	He	took	his
spectacles	off	his	nose,	wiped	them	with	his	handkerchief,	and	placed	them	back
on	his	nose,	the	nose	that	had	now	become	indomitable.	It	was	a	truly	nasal	nose,
trite	and	inane,	consisting	of	two	parallel,	finite	tubes.	And	he	said:
"What	do	you	mean,	a	spirit?"
"My	spirit!"	I	exclaimed.	He	then	asked:
"You	mean	the	spirit	of	your	home,	your	country?"
"No,	not	of	my	country,	my	own	spirit!"
"Your	own?"	he	asked	amiably,	"we're	talking	about	your	spirit	then?	But	are	weat	least	familiar	with	the	spirit	of	King	Ladislas?"
What,	King	Ladislas?	I	felt	like	a	train	suddenly	shunted	to	the	siding	of	King
Ladislas.	Stopped	in	my	tracks,	my	mouth	open,	I	realized	that	I	was	not	familiar
with	the	spirit	of	King	Ladislas.
"And	are	we	familiar	with	the	spirit	of	the	times?	How	about	the	spirit	of
Hellenic	civilization?	And	the	Gallic,	and	the	spirit	of	moderation	and	good
taste?	And	the	spirit	of	the	sixteenth	century	bucolic	writer,	known	only	to
myself,	who	was	the	first	to	use	the	word	'umbilicus'?	And	the	spirit	of
language?	Should	one	say	'use'	or	'utilize'?"
His	questions	caught	me	by	surprise.	Ten	thousand	spirits	suddenly	smothered
my	spirit,	I	mumbled	that	I	didn't	know,	he	then	pressed	on:	what	did	I	know
about	the	spirit	of	the	poet	Kasprowicz	and	his	attitude	toward	the	peasantry,	he
then	asked	about	the	historian	Lelewel's	first	love.	I	cleared	my	throat	and
quickly	glanced	at	my	nails—they	were	blank,	no	crib	notes	there.	I	turned	my
head	as	if	expecting	someone	to	prompt	me.	But	of	course	there	was	no	one
there.	What	a	nightmare,	for	God's	sake!	What	was	happening?	O	God!	I	quickly
turned	my	head	back	to	its	usual	position	and	looked	at	him,	but	with	a	gaze	that
was	no	longer	mine,	it	was	the	gaze	of	a	schoolboy	scowling	childishly	and
filled	with	hatred.	I	was	suddenly	seized	with	an	inappropriate	and	rather	old 
fashioned	itch—to	hit	the	prof	with	a	spitball	right	on	the	nose.	Realizing	that	I
was	losing	it,	I	made	a	supreme	effort	to	ask	Pimko	in	a	genial	tone	about	recent
events	in	town,	but	then,	instead	of	my	normal	voice	a	broken,	squeaky	sound
came	out,	as	if	my	voice	were	changing	back,	so	I	fell	silent;	and	Pimko	asked
about	adverbs,	told	me	to	decline	
mensa,	mensae,	mensae,	
to	conjugate	
amo,
amas,	amat,	
he	then	winced	and	said:	"Well,	yes,	we'll	have	to	work	on	it."	He
took	out	his	notebook	and	gave	me	a	bad	grade,	all	the	while	sitting,	and	his
sitting	was	absolute	and	final.
What?	What's	this?	I	wanted	to	scream	"I'm	not	a	schoolboy,	it's	all	a	mistake!"	I
tried	to	run	for	it,	but	something	caught	me	in	its	claws	from	behind	and	riveted
me	to	the	spot—it	was	my	puerile,	infantile	pupa.
{2}
	I	was	unable	to	move
because	of	my	pupa	while	the	prof,	still	seated,	and	while	sitting,	projected	such
perfect	prof authority	that	instead	of	screaming	I	raised	my	hand	to	speak,	like
boys	do	in	school.
"Sit	down,	Kowalski.	Not	to	the	bathroom	again?"
And	so	I	sat	through	this	surreal	nonsense,	gagged	and	steam rolled	by	the	prof,
I	sat	on	my	childish	little	pupa	while	he,	seated	as	if	on	the	Acropolis,	wrotesomething	in	his	notebook.	Finally	he	said:
"Well,	let's	go	to	school,	Joey."
"To	what	school?"
"To	Principal	Piorkowski's	school.	A	first rate	educational	institution.	There	are
still	vacancies	in	the	sixth	grade.	Your	education	has	been	sorely	neglected,	and
first	of	all	we	must	make	up	what	is	lacking."
"But	to	what	school?!"
"To	Mr.	Piorkowski's	school.	Don't	be	scared,	we	teachers	love	you	little
chickies,	chirp,	chirp,	chirp,	you	know:	'suffer	the	little	ones	to	come	unto	me.'	"
"But	to	what	school?!!!"
"To	Mr.	Piorkowski's	school.	He	asked	me	the	other	day	to	fill	all	the	vacancies.
The	school	must	stay	open.	There	would	be	no	school	without	pupils,	and	no
teachers	without	schools.	To	school!	To	school!	They'll	make	a	student	out	of
you	yet."
"But	to	what	school?!!!"
"Oh,	stop	fussing!	To	school!	To	school!"
He	called	the	maid	and	told	her	to	bring	my	coat,	but	the	girl	could	not
understand	why	this	strange	gentleman	was	about	to	take	me	away,	and	she
broke	into	wails,	so	Pimko	pinched	her—there	was	no	way	for	a	pinched	servant
girl	to	continue	her	wailing,	so	she	bared	her	teeth	and	burst	out	laughing	like	a
pinched	servant	would—he	then	took	me	by	the	hand	and	led	me	out	of	the
house,	and	in	the	street	houses	stood	as	usual	and	people	walked	about!
Help!	Police!	This	was	ridiculous!	Too	ridiculous	to	be	real!	Incredible	because
it	was	so	ridiculous!	Too	ridiculous	even	to	fight	back	...	I	couldn't	anyway—
against	this	inane	prof,	this	trivial	prof.	Just	as	you	can't	when	someone	asks	you
an	inane	and	trivial	question—so	I	couldn't	either.	My	idiotic,	infantile	pupa	had
paralyzed	me,	taking	away	all	my	ability	to	resist;	trotting	by	the	side	of	this
colossus	who	was	bounding	ahead	with	huge	steps,	I	could	hardly	keep	up
because	of	my	pupa.	Farewell,	O	Spirit,	farewell	my	
oeuvre	
only	just	begun,
farewell	genuine	form,	my	very	own,	and	hail,	hail,	oh	terrible	and	infantile
form,	so	callow	and	green!	Tritely	proffed	by	him,	I	ran	in	mincing	steps	by	the
side	of	the	giant	prof	who	muttered	on:	"Chirp,	chirp,	little	chickie	...	The
sniffling	little	nose	...	I	love,	ee,	ee	.	.	.	Little	fellow,	little,	little	man,	ee,	ee,	ee,
chirp,	chirp,	chickadee,	Joey,	Joey,	little	Joey,	tiny	Joey,	tinier	and	tinier,	chirp,
chirp,	tiny,	tiny	little,	little	pupa	..."	Ahead	of	us	a	refined	lady	was	walking	her
little	pinscher	on	a	leash,	the	dog	growled,	pounced	on	Pimko,	ripped	his	trouserleg,	Pimko	yelled,	expressed	a	unfavorable	opinion	of	the	dog	and	its	owner,
pinned	his	trouser	leg	with	a	safety	pin,	and	we	walked	on.2	Imprisonment	and	Further	Belittlement
And	now	before	us—no,	I	don't	believe	my	eyes—is	a	low	building,	a	school,
and	Pimko	drags	me	there	by	my	little	hand	despite	my	tears	and	protestations,
then	pushes	me	in	through	a	wicket	gate.	We	arrived	during	lunch	hour,	and	we
saw	in	the	school	yard	human	beings	of	that	transitional	age	between	ten	and
twenty	walking	in	circles	and	eating	lunch,	which	consisted	of	bread	and	butter
or	bread	and	cheese.	There	were	cracks	in	the	fence	surrounding	the	school	yard
through	which	mothers	and	aunts,	never	tiring	of	their	little	darlings,	were
peeking.	Pimko,	relishing	the	school	aroma,	breathed	it	in	through	his
thoroughbred	nasal	tubes.
"Chirp,	chirp,	chirp,	little	fellow,"	he	called	out,	"little,	little	fellow..."
At	the	same	time	an	intelligent looking	man	with	a	limp,	a	teacher	on	lunch hour
duty,	no	doubt,	approached	and	greeted	us,	with	all	due	servility	to	Pimko.
"My	dear	colleague,"	said	Pimko,	"here's	little	Joey	whom	I	would	like	to	enroll
into	the	ranks	of	your	sixth grade	students,	Joey,	say	'hello'	to	the	professor.	In	a
moment	I'll	have	a	chat	with	Piorkowski,	but	in	the	meantime	I'll	leave	him	with
you,	break	him	in	to	school	life."	I	wanted	to	protest,	but	instead	I	scraped	the
ground	with	my	foot,	a	light	breeze	came	up,	branches	of	trees	moved	slightly
and	with	them	a	tuft	of	Pimko's	hair.	"I	hope	he'll	be	on	his	best	behavior,"	said
the	old	pedagogue,	patting	me	on	my	little	head.	"How	are	the	youngsters
doing?"	Pimko	asked,	lowering	his	voice.	"I	see	they're	walking	in	circles—
that's	very	good.	They're	walking	about,	chatting,	while	their	mothers	are
snooping—very	good.	There's	nothing	better	for	a	school age	boy	than	having
his	mother	close	by,	behind	the	fence.	No	one	can	bring	out	that	fresh	baby	pupa
better	than	a	mother,	well	placed	behind	a	fence."
"Even	so,	they	are	still	not	naive	enough,"	the	teacher	complained	sourly,	"they
just	refuse	to	take	on	that	new potato	look.	We	set	their	mothers	on	them,	but
even	that's	not	enough.	We're	just	not	able	to	bring	out	that	youthful	freshness
and	naivete.	You	won't	believe,	my	dear	colleague,	how	stubborn	they	are	and
reluctant	to	comply	in	this	respect.	They	simply	don't	want	to."
"That's	because	you're	amiss	in	your	pedagogical	skills,"	Pimko	sternly	chastised
him.	"What?	They	don't	want	to?	But	they	have	to!	I'll	show	you	how	to	bring
about	naivete.	I	bet	that	in	half an hour	their	naivete	will	be	doubled.	My	plan	is
as	follows:	I'll	start	by	watching	the	students,	and	I'll	show	them	in	the	most
naive	manner	possible	that	I	think	they	are	naive	and	innocent.	This	will
infuriate	them	of	course,	they'll	want	to	show	me	that	they	are	not	naive,	andyou'll	see	how	this	will	plunge	them	into	genuine	naivete	and	innocence,	so
sweet	to	us	pedagogues!"
"Don't	you	think,	though,"	asked	the	teacher,	"that	instilling	naivete	in	the
students	is	a	somewhat	outdated,	antiquated	pedagogical	trick?"
"Precisely!"	replied	Pimko,	"give	me	more	of	those	antiquated	tricks!	The	more
antiquated	the	better!	There	is	nothing	better	than	a	truly	antiquated	pedagogical
trick!	The	little	cuties,	educated	by	us	in	this	perfectly	unreal	atmosphere,	yearn
for	life	and	real	experience,	and	therefore	nothing	bothers	them	more	than	their
innocence.	Ha,	ha,	ha,	let	me	suggest	to	them	right	now	that	they're	innocent,
box	them	up	in	this	amiable	concept,	and	you'll	see	how	innocent	they	become!"
With	that	he	slipped	behind	the	trunk	of	a	huge	oak	tree	growing	to	one	side	of
the	school	yard,	while	the	teacher	took	me	by	my	little	hand	and,	before	I	could
explain	or	protest,	led	me	to	the	other	students.	Having	done	so,	he	let	go	of	my
hand	and	left	me	in	their	midst.
The	students	walked	about.	Some	snapped	their	fingers	or	poked	each	other	in
the	ribs,	others,	having	blocked	their	ears	with	their	fingers	and	stuck	their	heads
in	their	books,	crammed	their	lessons	without	a	break,	some	played	copycat	or
tripped	one	another,	their	vacant	and	dumb	stares	slid	off	me,	not	recognizing	the
thirty year old	that	I	was.	I	stepped	up	to	one	of	the	students	closest	to	me—I
had	no	doubt	that	this	cynical	farce	must	soon	come	to	an	end.
"Hello,"	I	began,	"you	must	surely	realize	I'm	not..."
But	he	yelled:
"Look,	fellahs!	Novus	colegus!"
They	surrounded	me,	one	of	them	screamed:
"And	what	perfidious	whims	and	airs	have	perchance	caused	the	person	of	my
dear	Sir	to	present	himself	so	tardily	at	this	dump	of	a	s	c	h	o	o	l?"
Another	one	squeaked	and	laughed	like	an	idiot:
"Could	it	be	that	amours	for	a	damsel	have	delayed	our	colegus	venerabilis?	Is
this	perchance	why	our	presumptuous	colegus	so	languidus	est?"
I	fell	silent	at	this	grotesque	talk	as	if	someone	had	tied	my	tongue	into	knots,
but	they	went	on,	unable	to	stop	it	seemed—the	more	atrocious	their	words,	the
greater	their	delight—and	with	a	maniacal	stubbornness	they	befouled
themselves	and	everything	around	them.	And	they	went	on—the	fair	sex,
damsel,	wench,	Phoebus,	love lust,	gnome,	professorus,	lessonus	polonicus,
perfectus,	sexus.	Their	movements	were	clumsy—their	faces	looked	stuffed	and
bloated,	their	topics—sex	organs	in	the	younger	group,	sexual	exploits	in	theolder	group,	all	of	which,	in	conjunction	with	archaisms	and	Latin	endings,
created	a	singularly	disgusting	cocktail.	They	seemed	stuck	in	something,	ill 
placed,	off track	in	space	and	time,	furtively	peeking	at	the	teacher	or	at	their
mothers	behind	the	fence,	clutching	their	pupas,	all	the	while	aware	of	being
watched,	which	made	it	rather	difficult	for	them	to	eat	lunch.
I	stood	there	flabbergasted	by	it	all,	unable	to	see	the	rhyme	or	reason,	and	I
realized	that	the	farce	was	not	about	to	end.	When	those	formalists	noticed	a
strange	man	observing	them	closely	and	keenly	from	behind	the	oak	tree,	they
became	exceedingly	nervous,	and	whispers	spread	that	a	school	inspector	had
arrived	and	was	snooping	from	behind	the	tree.	"A	school	inspector!"	some	said,
reaching	for	their	books	and	ostentatiously	approaching	the	oak.	"A	school
inspector!"	said	others,	walking	away	from	the	oak,	but	none	of	them	could	take
their	eyes	off	Pimko	who,	standing	discretely	behind	the	tree,	was	making	notes
with	his	pencil	on	a	scrap	of	paper	torn	out	of	his	writing	pad.	"He's	taking
notes,"	they	whispered	right	and	left,	"he's	writing	down	his	observations."
Suddenly	Pimko	tossed	the	scrap	of	paper	into	the	air	with	a	deft	movement	of
his	hand,	as	if	the	wind	had	blown	it.	The	note	said:
On	the	basis	of	my	observations	conducted	during	lunch	hour	at	school	X,	I
came	to	the	conclusion	that	our	male	youth	is	innocent!	This	is	my	deepest
conviction.	And	my	evidence:	their	mien,	their	innocent	conversation,	as	well	as
their	cute	and	innocent	pupas.
T.	Pimko	September	29,	193	...	Warsaw
When	the	note	reached	the	students	the	school	swarmed	like	an	anthill.	"What?
We're	innocent?	We,	today's	youth,	innocent?	We,	who	already	screw	women?"
Laughter	and	tittering	grew,	impassioned	yet	secretive,	and	the	air	teemed	with
sarcasm.	"Oh,	what	a	naive	fuddy duddy!	What	naivete!	Hey,	what	naivete!"	I
soon	realized	however,	that	the	laughter	had	lasted	far	too	long	...	instead	of
abating	it	became	louder,	and,	while	asserting	itself,	it	seemed	unduly	contrived
in	its	fury.	What	was	happening?	Why	was	the	laughter	not	subsiding?	Not	until
later	did	I	realize	the	kind	of	poison	that	the	satanic	and	Machiavellian	Pimko
had	injected	into	them.	Because,	in	truth,	those	puppy	dogs,	confined	to	school
and	distanced	from	life—were	indeed	innocent.	Yes,	they	were	innocent,	and	yet
they	were	not	innocent!	They	were	innocent	in	their	desire	not	to	be	innocent.
Innocent	when	they	held	a	woman	in	their	arms!	Innocent	when	they	struggled
and	fought.	Innocent	when	they	recited	poetry,	and	innocent	when	they	played
billiards.	Innocent	when	they	ate	and	slept.	Innocent	when	they	behaved
innocently.	Ever	threatened	by	a	sacrosanct	naivete,	even	as	they	spilled	blood,tortured,	raped,	or	cursed—they	did	everything	to	avoid	falling	into	innocence!
Therefore	their	laughter,	rather	than	calming	down,	grew	and	grew,	some
students	held	back	at	first	from	reacting	while	others	could	not—and	slowly	at
first,	then	faster	and	faster,	they	lapsed	into	filthy	talk	that	would	have	made	a
drunken	cabby	proud.	And	feverishly,	rapidly,	they	muttered	among	themselves
the	most	brutal	profanities	and	opprobrious	invectives,	while	others	chalked
graffiti	on	the	walls;	and	the	limpid	autumn	air	swarmed	with	words	a
hundredfold	worse	than	those	to	which	they	had	treated	me	in	the	beginning.	I
thought	I	was	dreaming—because	it	is	in	a	dream	that	we	fall	into	a	situation
more	stupid	than	anything	we	could	imagine.	I	tried	to	stop	them.
"Why	do	you	say	'f...'?"	I	feverishly	asked	one	of	them,	"why	do	you	say	that?"
"Oh,	shut	up,	you	puppy	dog!"	the	rogue	replied,	jabbing	me	in	the	ribs.	"It's	a
terrific	word!	You	say	it	too,	c'mon,	say	it,"	he	hissed	and	stepped	painfully	on
my	foot.	"Say	it,	now!	It's	our	only	defense	against	the	pupa!	Can't	you	see	that
the	inspector	behind	the	tree	is	treating	us	to	the	pupa?	You	wimp,	you	French
poodle,	if	you	don't	talk	dirty	this	minute	I'll	twist	your	ear.	Hey,	Mizdral,	come
here	and	keep	an	eye	on	this	new	fellow	so	he	behaves	himself.	And	you,	Hopek,
tell	us	a	filthy	joke.	Go	for	it,	gentlemen,	or	he	too	will	treat	us	to	the	pupa!"
Having	given	these	orders	the	vulgar	scamp,	whom	they	called	Kneadus,
sneaked	up	to	the	oak	tree	and	carved	upon	it	four	letters	that	neither	Pimko	nor
the	mothers	behind	the	fence	could	see.	A	subdued	titter	brimming	with	hidden
delight	came	from	all	around,	and	when	the	mothers	behind	the	fence	and	Pimko
behind	the	tree	heard	their	youngsters	laughing	they	too	joined	in	with	their
benevolent	laughter—a	twofold	laughter	resulting.	Because,	having	duped	their
elders,	the	laughter	of	the	young	was	full	of	mischief,	while	the	laughter	of	the
older	people,	in	reaction	to	their	youngsters'	carefree	gaiety,	was	good natured
and	benevolent—and	so	in	the	calm	autumn	air	the	two	forces	struggled	with
each	other	amid	the	leaves	falling	from	the	tree,	amid	the	hustle	and	bustle	of
school	life,	the	elderly	janitor	sweeping	litter	into	a	dustpan,	the	grass	turning
yellow,	the	pale	sky...
Yet	suddenly	it	all	seemed	so	naive—Pimko	behind	the	tree,	the	scamps	crowing
with	delight,	the	toadies	with	noses	in	their	books—	the	whole	situation	became
so	disgustingly	naive	that	I	felt	I	was	drowning,	along	with	all	my	unspoken
protestations.	And	I	did	not	know	whether	I	should	rescue	myself,	my
schoolmates,	or	Pimko.	I	moved	slightly	closer	to	the	tree	and	whispered:
"Professor,	sir.""What?"	Pimko	asked,	also	in	a	whisper.
"Please	come	out	of	there,	sir.	They've	written	a	dirty	word	on	the	other	side	of
the	tree.	That's	why	they're	laughing.	Please,	sir,	come	out."
And	as	I	whispered	these	fatuous	words	into	thin	air,	it	occurred	to	me	that	I	had
become	some	kind	of	mystical	conjurer	of	stupidity,	and	my	own	position
frightened	me—my	hands	cupped	over	my	mouth,	by	an	oak	tree,	in	a	school
yard,	whispering	something	to	Pimko	standing	behind	a	tree...
"What?"	asked	the	professor,	crouching	behind	the	tree,	"what	have	they
written?"
A	car	honked	in	the	distance.
"A	dirty	word!	They've	written	a	dirty	word!	Please	come	out,	sir!"
"Where	did	they	write	it?"
"On	this	oak	tree.	On	the	other	side.	Please,	sir,	come	out	and	put	an	end	to	this!
Don't	let	them	make	fun	of	you!	You	wanted	to	make	them	think	they're	naive
and	innocent,	but	instead	they've	written	a	dirty	word	for	you	...	Stop	this
teasing.	That's	enough.	I	can't	go	on	like	this,	talking	into	thin	air.	I'll	go	crazy.
Please,	sir,	come	out!	Enough's	enough!"
Gossamer	threads	of	Indian	summer	drifted	about	while	I	thus	carried	on	in
whispers,	leaves	were	falling	...
"What?	What's	this?"	Pimko	exclaimed,	"am	I	to	doubt	the	purity	of	our	youth?
Never!	You	can't	tell	this	to	an	old	dog	like	me,	and	a	pedagogue	at	that!"
He	stepped	out	from	behind	the	tree,	and	at	the	sight	of	this	figure	of	a	potentate
the	students	burst	into	a	wild	roar.
"My	dear	young	men!"	he	said	after	they	calmed	down	somewhat.	"Don't
imagine	that	I	don't	know	that	you	use	foul	and	obscene	language	among
yourselves.	I'm	well	aware	of	it.	But	don't	you	worry,	neither	this	nor	any	of	your
other	transgressions	will	shake	my	deepest	conviction	that	at	bottom	you	are
modest	and	innocent.	Your	old	friend	here	will	always	think	of	you	as	pure,
modest,	and	innocent,	he	will	always	believe	in	your	modesty,	purity,	and
innocence.	As	to	dirty	words,	well,	I	know	you're	just	repeating	them	after	some
servant	girl,	not	really	understanding	them,	just	to	show	off.	Well,	well,	well,
there's	nothing	wrong	with	that,	on	the	contrary it's	more	innocent	than	you
think."
He	sneezed,	wiped	his	nose	with	great	satisfaction,	and	proceeded	to	the
administration	building	to	discuss	my	case	with	Principal	Piorkowski.	Mothers
and	aunts	behind	the	fence	were	ecstatic,	they	fell	into	one	another's	arms	andreiterated:	"What	a	seasoned	pedagogue!	Oh,	what	cute	little	pupas,	pupas,	pupas
our	little	darlings	have!"	But	among	the	students	his	speech	evoked	nothing	but
dismay.	Dumbfounded,	they	watched	Pimko	walk	away,	but	as	soon	as	he	was
out	of	sight	a	hail	of	invectives	followed.	"Did	you	hear	that?"	roared	Kneadus,
"we're	innocent,	shit,	screw	that!	He	thinks	we're	innocent—he	takes	us	for
innocents!	He	insists	we're	innocent!	Innocent!"	And	in	no	way	could	he
extricate	himself	from	the	word	that	had	entrapped	and	shackled	him,	and	was
now	killing	him,	yet	it	somehow	grounded	him	ever	more	in	naivete	and
innocence.	Just	at	that	moment	a	tall,	well built	youth	whom	his	classmates
called	Syphon—it	was	now	his	turn	to	be	swept	into	the	naivete	that	was	raging
in	the	air—said	to	himself,	yet	so	that	everyone	could	hear,	in	the	clear	and
limpid	air	which	made	a	voice	sound	like	cowbells	in	the	mountains:
"Innocence?	And	why	not?	Innocence	is	a	virtue...	One	should	be	innocent...
And	why	not?"
No	sooner	did	he	say	it	than	Kneadus	pounced	on	his	words.
"What?	You	believe	in	innocence?"
And	he	took	a	step	back,	because	it	sounded	so	silly.	This	annoyed	Syphon,	who
in	turn	pounced	on	Kneadus'	words.
"I	believe	in	it!	And	why	shouldn't	I?	I'm	not	childish	in	this	respect."
This	in	turn	annoyed	Kneadus,	who	started	hurling	mockeries	into	the	echoing
air.
"Did	you	all	hear	that?	Syphon	is	innocent!	Ha,	ha,	ha,	Syphon	the	innocent!"
Cries	of	"Syphonus	innocentus!	Has	the	arrogant	Syphon	perchance	not	been
with	a	woman?"	came	from	everywhere.	A	shower	of	lewd	epigrams	in	the	style
of	poets	Rey	and	Kochanowski	rained	down,	and	for	a	brief	moment	the	world
became	soiled	again.	But	the	epigrams	annoyed	Syphon	even	more,	and	he	dug
in	his	heels.
"Yes,	I	am	innocent—and	what's	more,	I	don't	know	anything	about	such	things,
and	I	don't	see	why	I	should	be	ashamed.	Friends,	surely	not	one	of	you	can
seriously	maintain	that	filth	is	better	than	purity."
And	he	took	a	step	back,	because	it	sounded	so	awkward.	Everyone	fell	silent.
Finally	there	was	whispering:
"Syphon,	you're	not	joking?	You	don't	know	about	the	facts	of	life,	really?
Syphon,	it	can't	be	true!"
And	they	all	took	a	step	back.	Kneadus	spat	on	the	ground.
"It's	true,	gentlemen!	Just	look	at	him!	It	shows!	Ugh!	Yuck!"Then	Mizdral	exclaimed:
"Syphon,	that's	impossible,	you're	bringing	shame	on	us,	go	ahead,	get	initiated
into	the	facts	of	life!"
Syphon	"What?	Me?	I'm	supposed	to	get	initiated?"
Hopek	"For	heaven's	sake,	Syphon,	think,	this	isn't	only	your	concern,	you're
bringing	shame	on	us,	on	all	of	us—I	won't	dare	to	look	at	a	gal	again."
Syphon	"There	are	no	gals,	there	are	only	lasses."
Kneadus	"La	.	.	.	did	you	hear	that?	Maybe	only	lads	then,	eh?	How	about	lads?"
Syphon	"That's	right,	you	took	it	right	out	of	my	mouth—'lads'!	Friends,	why
should	we	be	ashamed	of	this	word?	Is	it	worse	than	any	other?	And	why	should
we,	in	this	reborn	country	of	ours,	be	ashamed	of	our	'lasses'?	On	the	contrary,
we	should	cultivate	them	in	our	hearts!	Why,	may	I	ask,	should	we	be	ashamed,
merely	for	the	sake	of	some	contrived	cynicism,	of	such	pure	words	as	'lad,'
'eaglet,'	'knight,'	'falcon,'	'lass'—they're	surely	closer	to	our	hearts	than	the	vulgar
lingo	with	which	our	friend	Kneadalski	is	polluting	his	imagination."
"Hear,	hear!"	seconded	a	few.
"You	toady!"	shouted	others.
"Colleagues!"	Syphon	exclaimed,	now	really	carried	away,	relentless,	and
intoxicated	with	his	own	innocence.	"Lift	up	your	hearts!	I	suggest	we	take	an
oath	this	moment	never	to	renounce	the	lad	nor	the	eaglet!	
We'll	never	forfeit	the
land	of	our	birth!
{3}
	Because	our	birth	springs	forth	from	the	'lad'	and	the	'lass'!
'Lad'	and	'lass'—that's	our	land!	Whoever	is	young	and	noble,	follow	me!	Our
slogan—youthful	zeal!	Our	password—youthful	faith!"
In	response	to	this	call	a	few	of	Syphon's	followers,	carried	away	by	youthful
zeal,	raised	their	hands	and,	with	faces	suddenly	solemn	and	radiant,	took	the
oath,	and,	in	the	air	so	limpid	and	clear	Kneadus	pounced	on	Syphon,	who
became	furious—but	fortunately	they	were	separated	before	a	fight	broke	out.
"Gentlemen!"	reviled	Kneadus,	"why	don't	you	kick	this	eaglet,	this	lad,	in	the
butt?	Don't	you	have	any	guts?	Where's	your	pride?	Kick	him,	why	don't	you
kick	him?	Only	a	kick	can	save	you!	Show	him	your	manhood!	Show	him	that
we're	guys	who	go	with	gals,	not	some	lads	who	go	with	lasses!"
He	ranted	and	raved.	I	looked	at	him,	drops	of	sweat	on	my	brow,	my	cheeks
shrouded	in	pallor.	Yet	a	glimmer	of	hope	sustained	me,	I	thought	that	after
Pimko's	departure	I	would	somehow	regain	my	bearings	and	manage	to	explain
things—but	how	was	I	supposed	to	regain	my	bearings	when	a	couple	of	steps
away,	in	the	cool	and	bracing	air,	naivete	and	innocence	were	on	the	rise.	Thepupa	had	rolled	over	the	lads	and	the	guys.	The	world	seemed	to	have	collapsed
and	reset	itself	in	the	mode	of	the	lad	and	the	guy.	I	took	a	step	back.
Now	the	irate	Syphon	called	out	into	the	pale	blue	expanse,	as	he	stood	on	the
hard	ground	of	the	school	yard,	which	was	covered	with	veins	of	shadow	and
blotches	of	light:
"Excuse	me,	Kneadalski	is	talking	nonsense,	he's	setting	us	up!	I	suggest	we
ignore	him	and	act	as	if	he	doesn't	even	exist,	off	with	him,	my	friends,	he's	a
traitor,	a	traitor	to	his	own	youth,	he	has	no	ideals!"
"What	ideals,	you	ass?	What	ideals?	Your	ideals,	no	matter	how	beautiful,	can't
be	any	better	than	you	are,"	fumed	Kneadus,	his	words	gathering	steam,	"don't
you	all	realize,	can't	you	see	that	his	ideals	are	fat	and	pink	with	large	noses?
You	dogs!	It	will	be	a	disgrace	to	show	ourselves	in	the	street!	Don't	you	see
how	real	guys,	the	sons	of	janitors	and	peasants,	apprentices	of	all	sorts,
handymen	and	farmhands	our	age,	are	poking	fun	at	us!	They	think	we're
nothing!	Defend	the	guy	against	the	lad!"	he	pleaded	in	all	directions.	"Stand	up
for	the	guy	in	us!"
Indignation	grew.	The	students,	their	cheeks	flushed,	went	at	each	other,	Syphon
stood	immobile,	his	hands	folded	on	his	breast,	while	Kneadus	clenched	his	fists.
Behind	the	fence	mothers	and	aunts,	without	quite	grasping	what	was	going	on,
were	also	highly	excited.	Yet	the	majority	of	students	were	undecided,	and,
stuffing	themselves	with	bread	and	butter,	simply	reiterated:
"Is	the	presumptuous	Kneadus	perchance	a	ribald?	Is	Syphonus	an	idealistus?
Noses	to	our	books,	let's	cram,	cram,	cram	or	we'll	flunk!"
Others,	preferring	not	to	be	mixed	up	in	all	this,	led	tactful	conversations	about
sports	and	pretended	to	be	greatly	interested	in	a	football	match.	But	now	and
then	one	or	another,	evidently	unable	to	resist	the	scorching	and	burning	issues
of	the	dispute,	would	listen,	ponder	awhile,	and,	cheeks	flushed,	join	either
Syphon's	or	Kneadus'	camp.	The	teacher	dozed	off	on	a	bench	in	the	sun	and,
from	afar,	smacked	his	lips	at	the	youthful	naivete.	"Hey,	the	pupa,	the	pupa,"	he
purred.	Only	one	student	had	not	been	swept	away	by	the	general	ideological
excitement.	He	stood	to	one	side,	dressed	in	a	knit	shirt,	soft	flannel	pants,	a
delicate	gold	chain	round	his	left	wrist,	calmly	warming	himself	in	the	sun.
"Hey,	Kopyrda!"	each	side	called	to	him,	"Kopyrda,	join	us!"	He	seemed	to	be
the	subject	of	general	envy,	both	hostile	camps	wanted	to	win	him	over,	but	he
did	not	heed	either	side.	He	moved	one	foot	forward	and	wiggled	it	to	and	fro.
"We	don't	give	a	hoot	for	the	opinions	of	janitors'	sons,	apprentices,	and	all	thestreet	riffraff!"	exclaimed	Pyzo,	a	friend	of	Syphon's,	"they're	all	dumb."
"And	what	about	schoolgirls?"	Mizdral	anxiously	asked,	"don't	you	care	about
the	opinions	of	schoolgirls?	Just	imagine,	what	will	schoolgirls	think?"
Shouts	came	from	all	around:
"Schoolgirls	love	those	who	are	pure!"
"No,	no,	they	prefer	the	filthy	ones!"
"Schoolgirls?!"	Syphon	mouthed	disdainfully,	"we	care	only	about	the	opinions
of	noble minded	lasses,	and	they	are	on	our	side!"
Kneadus	walked	up	to	him	and	said,	his	voice	breaking:
"Syphon!	You	wouldn't	do	this	to	us,	would	you?!	Take	back	what	you've	just
said,	and	I	will	too!	Let's	both	drop	it,	shall	we?	I'm	ready	to...	to	apologize	to
you,	I'm	ready	to	do	anything...	as	long	as	you	retract	your	words	about	those
lads'	and	...	let	yourself	be	initiated.	Retract	'lads.'	And	I'll	retract	'guys.'	This
isn't	just	your	own	personal	matter,	you	know."
But	before	answering,	Syphon	Pylaszczkiewicz	gave	him	a	bright	and	gentle
look,	yet	a	look	that	was	full	of	inner	strength.	With	such	a	look	must	come	a
strong	reply.	Taking	a	step	back,	he	therefore	said:
"I'm	ready	to	give	my	life	for	my	ideals!"
But	Kneadus	had	already	moved	in	on	him,	his	fists	clenched.
"Onward!	Charge!	Get	him,	guys!	Beat	the	lad!	Kill	him,	kill	him,	beat	him	up,
kill	the	lad!"
"Here,	lads,	here!"	exclaimed	Syphon	Pylaszczkiewicz,	"stick	up	for	me,	I
haven't	lost	my	innocence	yet,	I'm	your	lad,	stick	up	for	me!"	he	went	on	with	a
piercing	voice.	And	hearing	his	call	many	of	them	were	moved	within	by	the
"lad"	against	the	"guy."	They	formed	a	tight	circle	around	Syphon,	and	they
stood	their	ground	against	the	followers	of	Kneadus.	Blows	fell,	Syphon	jumped
up	on	a	rock,	rousing	his	own	to	resist,	but	now	Kneadus'	followers	had	the
upper	hand	and	Syphon's	retinue	was	retreating	and	breaking	up.	Suddenly,	in
the	face	of	defeat,	and	with	what	remained	of	his	strength,	Syphon	intoned	the
Falcons'	March:
{4}
Hey,	lads	and	Falcons,	give	him	vigor	and	brawn,	Wake	him	up	from	the	dead,
make	him	rise	and	live	on!
The	song,	which	they	took	up	instantly,	grew	and	swelled,	crested	and	rolled	like
a	wave.	They	stood	motionless,	singing,	and,	with	Syphon's	lead,	fixed	their
gaze	on	a	distant	star	and	also	at	the	very	noses	of	their	assailants.	Whereuponthe	assailants'	clenched	fists	dropped	helplessly	to	their	sides.	They	no	longer
had	any	idea	how	to	get	at	their	opponents,	how	to	provoke	or	taunt	them—
while	the	others	sang	with	ever	greater	power,	ardor,	and	fervor,	aiming	their
star inspired	song	straight	at	the	noses	of	their	assailants.	One	after	another	of
Kneadus'	followers	whispered	something	under	his	breath,	fidgeted	in	his	place,
shifted	aimlessly	this	way	and	that,	then	stepped	aside,	until	finally	there	was
nothing	left	for	Kneadus	to	do	but	clear	his	throat	uneasily	and	walk	away.
.	.	.	Sometimes	a	morbid	dream	will	take	us	to	a	land	where	everything	chokes
us,	corrupts	and	inhibits	us	because	it	pertains	to	the	time	of	our	youth	and	is
therefore	young,	yet	it	has	now	become	outworn,	old,	and	archaic,	and	there	is
no	torment	equal	to	the	torment	of	such	a	dream,	such	a	land.	There	is	nothing
more	horrible	than	to	delve	into	issues	one	has	long	outgrown,	the	old		issues	of
youth	and	immaturity	that	have	long	since	been	pushed	into	a	corner	and	settled
...	for	example	the	question	of	innocence.	Oh,	threefold	wise	are	they	who	live
solely	by	today's	concerns,	the	concerns	of	maturity	and	of	the	prime	of	life,
leaving	outdated	problems	to	elderly	aunts.	Because	making	the	choice	as	to	the
subject	matter	and	the	issues	one	will	address	is	immensely	important	to	the
individual,	just	as	it	is	to	entire	nations,	and	we	so	often	see	that	a	person	who	is
mature	and	sagacious	in	his	dealings	with	mature	matters	becomes,	in	the
twinkling	of	an	eye,	painfully	immature	when	confronted	with	matters	that	are
too	puerile	or	too	far	in	the	past—and	incompatible	with	the	spirit	of	the	times
and	the	rhythm	of	history.	Truly,	there	is	no	easier	way	of	inflicting	naivete	and
infantilizing	humanity	than	by	presenting	it	with	problems	of	this	kind,	and	I
must	admit	that	Pimko,	with	a	masterly	skill	worthy	of	the	most	eminent	and
consummate	of	all	profs,	embroiled	me	and	my	schoolmates	in	a	dialectic	and	in
a	set	of	problems	that	were	more	infantilizing	than	one	could	ever	imagine.	I
thus	found	myself	in	the	epicenter	of	a	tirelessly	belittling	and	devaluing	dream.
A	flock	of	pigeons	flew	by	in	the	autumn	sun	and	air,	then	swept	in	over	the
roof,	touched	down	on	the	oak,	and	flew	off	again.	Kneadus,	unable	to	stomach
Syphon's	triumphant	song,	dragged	himself,	along	with	Mizdral	and	Hopek,	to
the	far	corner	of	the	school	yard.	After	a	while	he	recovered	and	regained	his
speech.	He	stared	vacantly	at	the	ground,	then	finally	exploded:
"Well—and	what	now?!"
"What	now?"	replied	Mizdral,	"nothing,	except	that	we	must	redouble	our
energies,	and	go	on	using	the	choicest	obscenities	we	know!	Four letter	words,
four letter	words—that's	our	only	weapon.	That's	a	guy's	weapon!""What,	again?"	Kneadus	asked.	"Again?	Till	they're	sick	of	it?	Round	and	round
in	circles?	Keep	repeating	our	tune	just	because	Syphon	is	humming	his	tune?"
He	broke	down.	He	opened	his	hands,	retreated	a	couple	of	steps,	and	looked
around.	The	heavens	above	drooped,	light,	pale,	cool,	and	sneering,	while	the
tree—that	stalwart	oak	in	the	school	yard turned	its	back	and	the	old	janitor	by
the	gate	laughed	up	his	sleeve	and	walked	away.
"A	farmhand,"	whispered	Kneadus,	"a	farmhand	...	think	of	it—	what	if	some
farmhand	overheard	our	intellectual	drivel.	.	."	And,	suddenly	terrified,	he	tried
to	escape,	he	wanted	to	make	a	run	for	it	in	the	limpid	air.	"Enough,	enough,	I've
had	it	with	the	lad	and	the	guy,	I've	had	enough..."
His	friends	caught	up	with	him.
"Hey	Kneadie,	what's	the	matter	with	you?"	they	said,	bathed	in	the	limpid	air,
"you're	our	leader!	We	can't	manage	without	you!"
Seized	and	held	by	his	wrists,	Kneadus	bowed	his	head	and	said	bitterly:
"Tough	luck..."
Mizdral	and	Hopek	were	shocked	and	speechless.	In	his	distraction	Mizdral
picked	up	a	piece	of	wire	and	absentmindedly	poked	it	through	a	hole	in	the
fence,	injuring	the	eye	of	one	of	the	mothers.	But	he	threw	the	wire	away
immediately.	The	mother	groaned	behind	the	fence.	Finally	Hopek	asked
timidly:
"Well,	Kneadie,	what	next?"
Kneadus	shook	off	his	momentary	dejection.
"There's	no	other	way—we	must	fight!"	he	said,	"fight	till	we	drop!"
"Hooray!"	they	exclaimed.	"That's	what	we	want	to	hear!	You're	our	man,	our
old	Kneadus!"
But	the	leader	again	waved	his	hand	with	an	air	of	hopelessness.
"Oh,	save	your	breath!	Your	cries	are	no	better	than	Syphon's	song!	However,
what	must	be	must	be.	You	want	to	fight,	do	you?	But	fighting	isn't	the	answer.
Let's	say	we	knock	his	teeth	out,	so	what?	That's	playing	right	into	his	hands—
we'll	make	him	a	martyr,	and	then	you'll	see	what	unshaken	yet	oppressed
innocence	he'll	lord	over	us.	Besides,	even	if	we	were	to	launch	an	attack,	you
saw	what	happened—they'll	put	on	such	a	pretense	of	bravery	that	even	the
toughest	in	our	group	will	turn	tail	and	run.	No,	that	won't	do!	And	all	the	rest	of
it—curses,	misdemeanors	of	all	sorts,	filth—it's	all	useless,	useless!	It's	only
grist	for	his	mill,	I	tell	you,	it's	just	baby's	milk	for	his	'lad.'	I'm	sure	he's
counting	on	it!	No,	no,	but	fortunately,"	and	here	Kneadus'	voice	becamestrangely	rabid,	"as	luck	would	have	it,	there	is	another	way...	that's	more
effective	...	we'll	take	away,	once	and	for	all,	his	inclination	to	sing."
"How?"	they	asked	with	a	glimmer	of	hope.
"Gentlemen,"	he	said,	dryly	and	to	the	point,	"since	Syphon	isn't	willing,	we'll
have	to	initiate	him	by	force.	We'll	capture	him	and	tie	him	up.	As	luck	would
have	it,	there	is	a	way	to	get	inside	him—	through	the	ears.	We'll	tie	him	up,	and
we'll	initiate	him	so	that	even	his	own	mother	won't	recognize	him!	We'll	destroy
the	little	treasure	once	and	for	all!	But	be	quiet!	Get	some	ropes	ready!"
I	listened	to	this	plot	with	bated	breath,	my	heart	pounding	in	my	chest,	but	at
that	moment	Pimko	appeared	in	the	door	of	the	school	building	and	beckoned
me	to	come	with	him	to	Principal	Piorkowski.	The	pigeons	were	back	again.
Flapping	their	wings,	they	settled	on	the	fence	behind	which	the	mothers	were
peeking.	I	walked	down	the	long	corridor,	frantically	seeking	a	way	to	explain
myself,	to	protest,	but	I	couldn't	do	it	because	Pimko	was	spitting	into	every
spittoon	we	passed	along	the	way	and	told	me	to	do	the	same...	I	just	couldn't
speak	out...	and	so,	spitting	and	walking,	we	reached	Principal	Piôrkowski's
office.	Piôrkowski,	a	giant	among	giants,	sitting	there	with	absolute	power	and
authority,	received	us	graciously,	then	promptly	gave	me	a	fatherly	pinch	on	the
cheek	and,	with	an	air	of	cordiality,	stroked	my	chin,	so	I	bowed	instead	of
protesting	while	he,	speaking	above	my	head,	addressed	Pimko	in	a	bass 
baritone.
"Oh,	the	pupa,	pupa,	pupa!	Thank	you	for	remembering	us	here,	dear	Professor!
And	God	bless	you,	dear	colleague,	for	the	new	pupil!	If	everyone	were	as	good
at	belittling	as	you	are,	our	school	would	be	twice	as	big!	The	pupa,	pupa,	pupa.
Would	you	believe	that	when	we	artificially	belittle	and	infantilize	adults	we	get
better	results	than	we	do	with	children	in	their	natural	state?	Oh,	the	pupa,	the
pupa,	there	would	be	no	school	without	pupils,	and	no	life	without	school!	I
commend	myself	to	you,	my	institution	doubtless	continues	to	deserve	support,
our	methods	of	turning	out	the	pupa	have	no	equal,	and	the	teaching	body	is
meticulously	selected	with	that	in	mind.	Would	you	like	to	see	the	body?"
"But	of	course,	my	pleasure,"	Pimko	replied,	"as	you	well	know nothing
influences	the	spirit	as	much	as	the	body	does."	The	principal	half opened	the
door	to	the	staff	room,	both	men	peeked	in,	and	I	with	them.	I	was	appalled!	In
the	large	room	teachers	sat	at	a	table	drinking	tea	and	munching	on	bread	rolls.
Never	before	had	I	seen	a	gathering	of	so	many,	so	hopeless	little	old	men.	Most
of	them	were	sniveling,	one	was	chomping	on	his	food,	a	second	one	wassmacking	his	lips,	a	third	was	sucking	his	tea,	a	fourth	was	slurping,	a	fifth	was
bald	and	sad,	while	the	French	teacher's	eyes	watered,	and	she	kept	wiping	them
with	the	corner	of	her	handkerchief.
"Yes,	Professor,"	the	principal	said	proudly,	"the	body	has	been	carefully	chosen
for	their	exceptionally	disagreeable	and	annoying	qualities,	there	is	not	one
pleasant	body	here,	all	strictly	pedagogical,	as	you	can	see	for	yourself,	and,	if
once	in	a	while	circumstances	force	me	to	hire	a	younger	teacher,	I	make	sure
that	he	has	at	least	one	repulsive	trait.	Take	the	history	teacher,	for	instance—he
is,	regretfully,	in	the	prime	of	his	life	and	at	first	glance	appears	to	be	all	right,
but	please	note	that	he	is	cross eyed."
"Yes,	but	the	French	teacher	seems	pleasant	enough,"	Pimko	said	in	an	informal
tone.
"She	stutters,	and	her	eyes	are	always	watering."
"Ah	yes!	You're	right,	I	didn't	notice	it	at	first.	But	isn't	she	rather	interesting?"
"Not	at	all,	I	can't	converse	with	her	for	more	than	a	minute	without	yawning	at
least	twice."
"Ah,	well,	I	see	your	point!	But	do	they	have	enough	experience	and	tact	to
teach,	are	they	sufficiently	aware	of	the	magnitude	of	their	mission?"
"These	are	the	soundest	brains	in	the	capital,"	replied	the	principal,	"but	not	one
of	them	has	a	single	thought	of	his	own	in	his	head;	if	one	of	them	should	spawn
a	thought,	I'd	be	sure	to	chase	away	either	the	thought	or	the	thinker.	They're
actually	a	bunch	of	harmless	duffers,	they	teach	only	what's	in	their	worksheets,
and,	no,	they	don't	entertain	a	single	thought	of	their	own."
"That's	the	pupa,	the	pupa,"	said	Pimko,	"I	can	see	I'm	placing	my	Joey	in	good
hands.	Because	there	is	nothing	worse	than	teachers	who	are	personable,
especially	if	they	happen	to	have	opinions	of	their	own.	Only	a	truly	irksome
pedagogue	can	inculcate	the	pupils	with	that	adorable	immaturity,	that	engaging
helplessness	and	clumsiness,	that	lack	of	
savoir	vivre	
that	should	be	the	hallmark
of	our	youth	so	they'll	provide	a	target	for	us,	the	earnest	and	inspired
pedagogues	that	we	are.	And	we	need	the	help	of	such	well chosen	staff	to
infantilize	the	whole	world."
"Tst,	tst,	tst,"	said	Principal	Piorkowski,	pulling	Pimko	by	the	sleeve,	"sure,	that's
the	pupa,	but	be	quiet,	don't	talk	about	it	too	loudly."
At	that	moment	one	body	turned	to	another	and	asked:
"Ho,	ho,	hmm,	well,	what's	up?	What's	up,	my	dear	colleague?"
"What's	up?"	replied	the	other	body,	"I	thought	prices	had	gone	down.""Gone	down?"	said	the	first	body,	"I	thought	prices	had	gone	up."
"Gone	up?"	asked	the	second	body,	"I	thought	they	had	gone	down	slightly."
"The	price	of	bread	rolls	just	isn't	going	down,"	muttered	the	first	body,	and
tucked	away	the	rest	of	his	unfinished	roll	into	his	pocket.
"I	keep	them	on	a	diet,"	whispered	Principal	Piorkowski,	"this	assures	their
anemic	condition.	Only	with	food	conducive	to	anemia	can	the	
age	ingrat	
warts,
warts	of	graceless	old	age,	flourish	in	full.
Suddenly	the	penmanship	teacher	noticed	the	principal	standing	with	a	strange
and	impressive looking	gentleman	at	the	door,	she	choked	on	her	tea	and
shrilled:
"School	inspector!"
At	this	cry	the	bodies	trembled,	stood	up,	and	flocked	together	like	a	covey	of
partridges,	but	the	principal,	not	wanting	to	scare	them	further,	gently	closed	the
door,	then	Pimko	kissed	me	on	the	forehead	and	said	solemnly:
"Well,	Joey,	go	to	your	classroom,	the	lessons	are	about	to	begin,	in	the
meantime	I'll	look	around	for	some	lodgings	for	you,	and	I'll	fetch	you	after
school	and	take	you	home."	I	wanted	to	protest,	but	this	despot	of	a	prof	had
proffed	me	with	his	absolutist	prof	so	suddenly	that	I	could	not,	so	I	just	bowed,
and,	full	of	unspoken	protests	and	roars	that	drowned	all	protests,	I	went	to	class.
And	the	class	was	roaring	too.	In	the	general	ruckus	the	students	were	taking
their	places	at	their	desks	and	shouting	as	if	in	a	moment	they	would	cease	to
speak	forever.
And,	seemingly	from	nowhere,	a	teacher	appeared	at	the	podium.	It	was	the
same	sad	and	pallid	body	that	had	so	gravely	opined	in	the	staff	room	that	prices
were	going	down.	He	sat	and	opened	the	attendance	book,	brushed	a	speck	of
dust	off	his	waistcoat,	rolled	up	his	sleeves	so	they	would	not	wear	out	at	the
elbows,	tightened	his	lips,	stifled	something	within	himself,	and	crossed	his	legs.
He	then	sighed	and	tried	to	speak.	The	rumpus	redoubled	in	strength.	Everyone
yelled	except	for	Syphon,	who,	with	an	air	of	self assurance,	pulled	out	his	notes
and	books.	The	teacher	looked	at	the	class,	straightened	one	of	his	cuffs,	pursed
his	lips,	then	opened	and	closed	them	again.	The	students	screamed.	The	teacher
knit	his	brow	and	winced,	checked	his	cuffs,	drummed	with	his	fingers,
pondered	something	far	away—pulled	out	his	watch	and	placed	it	on	his	desk,
sighed,	again	stifled	something,	or	gulped,	or	maybe	yawned	and,	having	finally
worked	up	enough	energy,	banged	the	attendance	book	on	the	desk	and
exploded:"That's	enough!	Calm	down,	will	you!	The	lesson	is	about	to	begin."
Whereupon	the	whole	class,	as	one	man	(except	for	Syphon	and	his	cohorts),
voiced	an	urgent	need	to	go	to	the	bathroom.
The	teacher,	popularly	known	as	Ashface	for	his	sickly	and	ashen	complexion,
smiled	sourly.
"That's	enough!"	he	exclaimed	mechanically.	"So	you	want	to	be	excused,	do
you?	The	soul	hankers	after	paradise,	eh?	And	why	is	it	that	nobody	excuses
me?	Why	do	I	have	to	stay	put?	Sit	down,	all	of	you,	no	one	is	excused,	and	I'm
writing	Kneadalski	and	Bobkowski	into	the	class	log,	and	if	I	hear	so	much	as	a
peep	from	anyone,	I'll	call	him	to	the	blackboard!"	Whereupon	no	fewer	than
seven	students	presented	notes	which	said	that,	due	to	such	and	such	an	illness,
they	had	not	been	able	to	do	their	homework.	Four	others	claimed	migraine
headaches,	one	broke	out	in	a	rash,	another	threw	himself	into	jerks	and
convulsions.	"I	see,"	said	Ashface,	"and	why	is	it	that	no	one	writes	a	note	for
me	saying	that,	for	reasons	beyond	my	control,	I	could	not	prepare	the	lesson?
Why	is	it	that	I	can't	have	convulsions?	Why,	I	ask	you,	instead	of	having
convulsions,	do	I	have	to	sit	here,	day	in	and	day	out,	Sundays	excluded?	Off
with	you,	your	notes	are	fake,	your	illnesses	are	fake,	sit	down,	I	know	what
you're	up	to!"	But	three	of	the	most	brazen	and	eloquent	students	approached	the
teacher's	desk	and	proceeded	to	tell	a	funny	story	about	the	Jews	and	the	birds.
Ashface	blocked	his	ears.	"No,	no,"	he	moaned,	"I	can't	stand	this,	have	pity	on
me,	stop	tempting	me,	this	is	supposed	to	be	a	class,	what	would	happen	if	the
principal	walked	in	on	us."
He	trembled	at	the	thought	and,	pale	with	fear,	looked	uneasily	at	the	door.
"And	what	if	the	school	inspector	should	catch	us?	Gentlemen,	I	warn	you,	the
inspector	is	visiting	the	school!	That's	right!...	I	warn	you,	gentlemen	...	This	is
no	time	for	foolishness!"	he	groaned	with	fear.	"In	the	face	of	this	higher
authority,	let's	pull	ourselves	together.
Well	.	.	.	hmm	.	.	.	which	one	of	you	has	mastered	the	subject	for	today?	Cut	out
this	nonsense,	this	is	no	time	for	joking	around!	Come	on,	speak	up.	What?!
Nobody	knows	anything?	You'll	be	the	ruin	of	me!	Come	on,	maybe	at	least	one
of	you,	come	on,	my	friends,	come	forward,	don't	hesitate	...	Ahh,	boys—
Syphon	Pylaszczkiewicz,	you	say?	God	bless	you,	Pylaszczkiewicz,	I've	always
thought	you	an	admirable	fellow.	Well,	Pylaszczkiewicz,	and	what	have	you
mastered?	
Konrad	Wallenrod?	
Or	
Forefathers'	Eve?	
Or	maybe	the	general
characteristics	of	romanticism?	Tell	me,	Pylaszczkiewicz."But	Syphon,	the	"lad"	now	well	entrenched	in	him,	stood	up	and	answered:
"I'm	sorry,	Professor,	but	I	cannot.	If	you	call	on	me	when	the	school	inspector	is
here,	I'll	answer	to	the	best	of	my	knowledge—but	in	the	meantime	I	can't	reveal
what	I	have	mastered,	because	by	revealing	it	I	would	not	be	true	to	myself."
"Syphon,	you'll	be	our	ruin,"	said	the	others,	terror stricken,	"c'mon,	speak	up!"
"Well,	well,	Pylaszczkiewicz,"	Ashface	said	in	a	conciliatory	tone,	"why	don't
you	come	out	in	the	open,	Pylaszczkiewicz?	We're	among	friends,	aren't	we?
Tell	me	the	truth,	Syphon	Pylaszczkiewicz.	Surely	you	don't	mean	to	ruin	the
two	of	us,	do	you?	If	you	don't	want	to	speak	openly,	let	me	know	somehow..."
"Sorry,	sir,"	replied	Syphon,	"but	I	can't	do	it	because	I'm	above	wheeling	and
dealing,	and	I	am	not	about	to	betray	my	principles,	nor	to	betray	myself."
And	he	sat	down.
"Tut,	tut,"	mumbled	the	teacher,	"these	are	honorable	sentiments,
Pylaszczkiewicz,	and	much	to	your	credit.	And	don't	take	all	this	to	heart,	I	was
just	making	a	private	joke	of	it.	Yes,	of	course,	one	should	always	remain
incorruptible,	so,	what	do	we	have	for	today?"	he	said	sternly	and	checked	his
worksheet.	"Ah,	yes!	Elucidate	and	explain	to	the	students	why	Slowacki
inspires	our	love	and	admiration?	Well	then,	gentlemen,	I'll	recite	for	you	my
lesson,	and	then	in	your	turn	you'll	recite	yours.	Quiet!"	he	yelled,	and	they	all
sprawled	themselves	on	their	desk	tops,	resting	their	heads	on	their	arms,	while
Ashface	inconspicuously	opened	the	appropriate	textbook,	tightened	his	lips,
sighed,	stifled	something	within	himself,	and	began	his	recitation:
"Hmm...	hmm	...	Well	then,	why	does	Slowacki	inspire	our	love	and	admiration?
Why	do	we	weep	with	the	poet	when	we	hear	the	Aeolian	strings	of	his	poem	
In
Switzerland?	
Or,	why	are	we	swept	away	when	we	hear	the	heroic	and	stalwart
verses	of	the	
Spirit	King?	
And	why	can't	we	tear	ourselves	from	the	wonders	and
magic	of	
Balladyna,	
why	do	the	wails	of	
Lilla	Weneda	
tearour	hearts	to	pieces?
And	why	are	we	so	willing	to	rush	and	speed	to	the	rescue	of	the	hapless	king?
Hmm	.	.	.	why?	Because,	gentlemen,	Siowacki—oh,	what	a	great	poet	he	was!
Walkiewicz!	Why?	Repeat	why,	Walkiewicz.	Why	the	admiration	and	love,	why
do	we	cry,	why	the	rapture,	why	the	heartbreak,	why	do	we	rush	and	speed?
Why,	Walkiewicz,	why?"
It	seemed	to	me	I	heard	Pimko	all	over	again,	but	a	Pimko	on	a	more	modest
salary	and	lacking	the	wider	horizons.
"Because	Slowacki—oh,	what	a	great	poet	he	was!"	Walkiewicz	repeated,	while
other	students	carved	their	desk	tops	with	pocket	knives	or	made	tiny	paperballs,	the	tiniest	they	could	make,	and	pitched	them	into	their	inkwells.	They
pretended	these	were	fish	in	make believe	ponds,	and,	using	their	hair	as	fishing
lines,	they	tried	to	catch	the	fish	but,	alas,	the	paper	would	not	bite.	So	instead
they	tickled	their	noses	with	the	hair,	and	they	signed	their	names	in	their
notebooks	over	and	over	again,	with	or	without	curlicues,	while	one	of	them
practiced	his	penmanship	all	over	the	page:	"Why,	w h y,	w h y,	Slo wac ki,
Slo wac ki,	Slo wac ki,	wac ki,	wac ki,	Wa cek,	Wa cek Slo wac ki	and	a	f l y
and	a	f l e a."	They	all	looked	miserable.	What	happened	to	the	fervor,	to	the
disputes	and	discussions	of	just	a	few	moments	ago?	Only	a	few	fortunate	ones
seemed	to	have	forgotten	the	world	around	them	as	they	immersed	themselves	in
E.	Wallace's	writings.	Even	Syphon	had	to	exert	all	the	strength	of	his	character
to	keep	his	principles	of	self discipline	and	self amelioration	intact,	but	he	could
do	it	only	because,	for	him,	distress	was	a	source	of	bliss	and	a	measure	of	the
strength	of	his	character.	Whereas	the	others	cupped	their	hands	into	hollows	and
hillocks	and	blew	air	through	them,	Russian style:	hey,	hey,	hillocks	and
hollows,	hillocks	and	hollows	.	.	.	The	teacher	sighed,	stifled	something	within
himself,	looked	at	his	watch,	and	continued:
"A	great	poet!	Remember	that,	it's	important!	And	why	do	we	love	him?
Because	he	was	a	great	poet.	A	great	poet	he	was	indeed!	You	laggards,	you
ignoramuses,	I'm	trying	to	be	calm	and	collected	as	I	tell	you	this,	get	it	into	your
thick	heads—so,	I	repeat	once	more,	gentlemen:	a	great	poet,	Juliusz	Slowacki,	a
great	poet,	we	love	Juliusz	Slowacki	and	admire	his	poetry	because	he	was	a
great	poet.	Please	make	note	of	the	following	homework	assignment:	'What	is
the	immortal	beauty	which	abides	in	the	poetry	of	Juliusz	Slowacki	and	evokes
our	admiration?'	"
At	this	point	one	of	the	students	fidgeted	and	groaned:
"But	I	don't	admire	it	at	all!	Not	at	all!	It	doesn't	interest	me	in	the	least!	I	read
two	verses—and	I'm	already	bored.	God	help	me,	how	am	I	supposed	to	admire
it	when	I	don't	admire	it?"	His	eyes	popped,	and	he	sat	down,	thus	sinking	into	a
bottomless	pit.	The	teacher	choked	on	this	naive	confession.
"For	God's	sake	be	quiet!"	he	hissed.	"I'll	flunk	you.	Galkiewicz,	you	want	to
ruin	me!	You	probably	don't	realize	what	you've	just	said?"Galkiewicz
"But	I	don't	understand	it!	I	don't	understand	how	I	can	admire	it	when	I	don't
admire	it."
Teacher	"How	can	you	not	admire	it,	Galkiewicz,	when	I	told	you	a	thousand
times	that	you	do	admire	it."
Galkiewicz	"Well,	I	don't	admire	it."
Teacher	"That's	your	private	business.	Obviously,	Galkiewicz,	you	lack	the
intelligence.	Others	admire	it."
Galkiewicz	"Nobody	admires	it,	I	swear.	How	can	anybody	admire	it	when
nobody	reads	it	besides	us,	schoolboys,	and	only	because	we're	forced	to	..."
Teacher	"Quiet,	for	God's	sake!	That's	because	there	aren't	many	people	who	are
truly	cultural	and	up	to	the	task..."
Galkiewicz	"But	the	cultural	ones	don't	read	it	either.	Nobody	does,	nobody.
Absolutely	nobody."
Teacher	"Listen,	Galkiewicz,	I	have	a	wife	and	a	child!	Have	pity	on	the	child	at
least!	There's	no	doubt,	Galkiewicz,	that	we	should	admire	great	poetry,	and
Slowacki	was,	after	all,	a	great	poet...	Maybe	Slowacki	doesn't	move	you,
Galkiewicz,	but	you	can't	tell	me	that	Mickiewicz,	Byron,	Pushkin,	Shelley,
Goethe	don't	pierce	your	soul	through	and	through..."
Galkiewicz	"They	pierce	nobody.	Nobody	cares,	they're	bored	by	it	all.	Nobody
can	read	more	than	two	or	three	verses.	O	God!	I	can't..."
Teacher	"This	is	preposterous!	Great	poetry	must	be	admired,	because	it	is	great
and	because	it	is	poetry,	and	so	we	admire	it."
Galkiewicz	"Well,	I	can't.	And	nobody	can!	O	God!"
Sweat	covered	the	teacher's	brow	like	dew,	he	took	a	snapshot	of	his	wife	and
child	out	of	his	wallet	and	tried	to	move	Galkiewicz,	but	the	latter	repeated	his	"I
can't,	I	can't"	over	and	over	again.	And	the	piercing	"I	can't"	proliferated	and
grew	infectious,	mutterings	of	"we	can't	either"	came	from	all	corners,	and	a
generalized	inability	threatened	everyone.	The	teacher	found	himself	at	a	terrible
impasse.	Any	moment	there	could	be	an	outbreak	of—of	what?—of	inability,	at
any	moment	a	wild	roar	of	not	wanting	to	could	erupt	and	reach	the	headmaster
and	the	inspector,	at	any	moment	the	whole	building	could	collapse	and	bury	his
child	under	the	rubble,	and	here	was	this	Galkiewicz	with	his	"I	can't,	I	can't."
The	hapless	Ashface	felt	that	he	too	was	threatened	by	inability.
"Pylaszczkiewicz!"	he	yelled,	"you,	Pylaszczkiewicz,	why	don't	you	show	me,and	show	Galkiewicz	and	everybody	else,	the	beauty	of	some	splendid	passage!
But	hurry	up,	or	else	
periculum	in	mora!	
Pay	attention,	everybody!	If	I	hear	as
much	as	a	squeak	I'll	give	you	all	a	class	assignment!	We	must	shake	this
inability,	we	must,	or	woe	to	my	child!"
Syphon	Pylaszczkiewicz	stood	up	and	began	to	recite	a	poem.
And	he	recited.	Not	for	an	instant	did	he	succumb	to	the	general	and	suddenly
prevailing	inability,	on	the	contrary—he	was	totally	able,	because	he	derived	his
ability	from	the	inability	of	others.	He	recited	then,	and	he	recited	with	the
proper	intonation,	he	recited	with	emotion	and	from	the	depths	of	his	soul.
What's	more,	he	recited	beautifully,	and	the	beauty	of	his	recitation,	enhanced	by
the	beauty	of	the	poem,	by	the	greatness	of	the	poet,	and	by	the	majesty	of	art,
imperceptibly	transformed	itself	into	a	monument	to	all	possible	beauty	and
greatness.	What's	more,	he	recited	mysteriously	and	with	reverence;	he	recited	in
all	earnestness	and	with	inspiration;	and	he	sang	the	song	of	the	bard	as	a	bard's
song	should	be	sung.	Oh,	what	beauty!	What	greatness,	what	genius,	and	what
poetry!	Wall,	fly,	ink,	fingernails,	ceiling,	blackboard,	windows,	oh,	the	danger
of	inability	was	averted,	the	child	saved	and	the	wife	likewise,	everyone	said
yes,	yes,	because	they	now	could,	and	they	implored	him	to	stop,	because	it	was
all	too	much.	I	also	noticed	that	my	neighbor	was	smearing	my	hand	with	ink—
he	had	already	smeared	his	own	and	was	now	starting	on	mine	(because	he
couldn't	very	well	take	off	his	shoes	to	smear	his	feet),	yet	someone	else's	hands
were	awful	too	because	they	were	actually	just	like	one's	own,	but	so	what?
Nothing,	that's	what.	How	about	legs?	Swing	them?	What	for?	After	a	quarter 
of an hour	even	Galkiewicz	groaned	that	he'd	had	enough,	that	he	gets	it,	that	he
retracts	all	he	said	and	agrees	with	everything,	that	he	apologizes,	that	now	he
can.
"See,	Galkiewicz?	There's	nothing	like	school	to	inculcate	the	adoration	of	great
genius!"
But	strange	things	were	happening	to	the	listeners.	All	differences	had	vanished,
and	everyone,	be	it	under	the	colors	of	Syphon	or	of	Kneadus,	writhed	equally
under	the	weight	of	the	bard	and	the	poet,	of	Ashface	and	his	child,	and—of
stupor.	The	bare	walls,	the	black	school	desks	with	their	inkwells,	ceased	to
provide	diversion,	and	through	a	window	one	could	see	a	brick	sticking	out	of	a
wall	with	an	inscription	gouged	in	it:	"He's	been	kicked	out."	The	only	choice
remaining	was	between	the	pedagogic	body	and	one's	own	body.	Therefore	those
who	were	not	busy	counting	the	hairs	on	Ashface's	scalp	or	studying	the
complex	lacing	of	his	shoes	tried	to	count	their	own	hairs	and	to	dislocate	theirnecks.	Mizdral	fidgeted,	Hopek	tapped	mechanically,	while	Kneadus	kneaded
himself,	so	to	speak,	in	painful	exhaustion,	some	were	lost	in	reverie,	others
gave	in	to	the	awful	habit	of	whispering	to	themselves,	some	tore	off	their
buttons,	destroying	their	clothes,	and	jungles	and	deserts	of	eerie	gestures	and
bizarre	actions	blossomed	everywhere.	The	only	one	among	them	who	thrived
was	the	perverse	Syphon—the	greater	the	general	misery	the	better	he	felt—
because	he	had	that	special	inner	mechanism	for	turning	poverty	into	riches.	And
the	teacher,	still	preoccupied	with	his	wife	and	child,	went	on	and	on:
"Towiahski,	Towiahski,	Towiahski,	his	messianism	and	his	'forty	and	four,'
Poland—the	Christ	of	Nations,	flame	eternal,	sacrifice,	inspiration,	suffering,
redemption,	heroes,	and	symbols."	The	words	entered	my	ears	and	tortured	my
mind	while	faces,	contorting	more	and	more	horribly,	mangled,	weary,	crumpled,
and	stripped	of	any	notion	of	a	face,	seemed	ready	to	assume	any	face—one
could	make	those	faces	into	anything	one	wished—oh,	what	an	exercise	for	the
imagination!	And	reality	was	also	spent,	also	wrung	out,	crumpled	and	ruined
—
all	that	had	been	real	slowly,	imperceptibly	turned	into	a	world	of	ideals,	oh,
let	me	dream	now,	let	me!	
{5}
Ashface	went	on:	"He	was	a	bard!	He	sang!	Gentlemen,	I	beg	you,	let's	repeat
once	more—we	admire	him	because	he	was	a	great	poet,	and	we	revere	him
because	he	was	a	bard!	That's	the	key	word.	Ciemkiewicz,	please	repeat!"
Ciemkiewicz	repeated:	"He	was	a	bard!"
I	realized	that	I	had	to	run	away.	Pimko,	Ashface,	the	school,	my	schoolmates,
all	my	experiences	since	this	morning	suddenly	whirled	in	my	head	and,	as	in	a
lottery,	the	ticket	dropped	out	at—	run	away.	But	where?	Where?	I	didn't	know,
but	I	knew	I	had	to	run,	otherwise	I	would	fall	prey	to	all	the	freakishness	that
was	crowding	in	on	me	from	all	sides.	Yet	instead	of	running	away	I	wiggled	my
toe	inside	my	shoe,	and	the	wiggling	paralyzed	me	and	foiled	my	intentions	to
run,	because	how	was	I	to	run	while	I	was	still	wiggling	my	toe,	here	on	the	first
floor	of	the	school?	Run—run!	Run	from	Ashface,	run	from	unreality	and
boredom—but	in	my	head	was	the	bard,	squeezed	in	there	by	Ashface,	while
down	below	I	wiggled	my	toe,	how	could	I	run	then—my	inability	to	run	was
more	serious	than	the	inability	that	had	earlier	affected	Galkiewicz.	In	theory
nothing	seemed	easier—just	walk	out	of	the	school	and	don't	come	back—
Pimko	would	not	call	the	police	to	look	for	me,	the	tentacles	of	his	pupa
pedagogy	surely	did	not	extend	that	far.	All	I	needed	was—the	will	to	run.	But	I
lacked	the	will.	Because	to	run	one	needs	the	will,	but	where	is	the	will	to	come
from	when	one	is	wiggling	one's	toe	and	one's	face	is	nothing	but	a	face	ofboredom.	And	I	now	understood	why	no	one	could	run	from	the	school—it	was
their	faces,	their	whole	being	in	fact,	that	killed	their	ability	to	run,	everyone	was
a	prisoner	of	his	own	ghastly	face,	and	even	though	they	should	have	run	they
couldn't,	because	they	no	longer	were	what	they	should	have	been.	To	run	meant
not	only	running	from	school	but,	first	and	foremost,	running	from	oneself,	oh,
to	run	from	oneself,	from	the	sniveling	brat	into	which	Pimko	had	turned	me,
abandon	the	brat,	be	the	man	I	once	was!	But	how	is	one	supposed	to	run	from
something	one	i	s,	where	is	the	reference	point,	the	foothold	from	which	to
oppose	it?	Our	form	permeates	us,	imprisons	us	from	within	as	well	as	from
without.	I	felt	sure	that,	had	reality	asserted	itself	for	one	moment,	the	incredibly
grotesque	situation	in	which	I	found	myself	would	have	become	so	glaringly
obvious	that	everyone	would	have	exclaimed:	"What	is	this	grown	man	doing
here?"	But	against	the	background	of	the	general	freakishness	the	case	of	my
particular	freakishness	was	lost.	Oh,	give	me	one	uncontorted	face	next	to	which
I	can	feel	the	contortion	of	my	own	face,	but	instead—all	around	me	were	faces
that	were	twisted,	mangled,	and	turned	inside	out,	faces	that	reflected	my	own
like	a	distorting	mirror—and	this	mirror	image	of	reality	truly	held	me	down!
Was	it	a	dream?	An	apparition?	At	that	moment	Kopyrda—the	one	in	flannel
pants,	suntanned,	the	one	who,	that	time	in	the	school	yard,	had	smiled
superciliously	at	the	word	"schoolgirl"—drifted	into	my	field	of	vision.	Equally
indifferent	to	Ashface	as	to	Kneadus	and	Syphon,	he	bent	over	nonchalantly,
looking	just	fine,	normal,	in	fact—his	hands	in	his	pockets,	well	groomed,	spry,
easygoing,	just	so,	and	pleasant—he	sat	rather	disdainfully,	crossed	his	legs,	and
watched	one	of	his	legs.	As	if	sidestepping	school	with	his	legs.	A	dream?	An
apparition?	"Could	this	be	an	ordinary	boy	at	last?"	I	wondered.	"Not	a	lad,	not	a
guy,	but	just	an	ordinary	boy?	Maybe	thanks	to	him	we	would	regain	the	ability
we	had	lost..."3	Caught	with	His	Pants	Down	and	Further	Kneading
The	teacher	looked	at	his	watch	more	and	more	often,	the	students	took	out	their
watches	and	also	looked.	Finally	the	saving	bell	rang,	Ashface	broke	off	in	mid 
sentence	and	disappeared,	the	students	came	to	and	exploded only	Syphon
remained	quiet,	focused	and	self absorbed.	But	no	sooner	did	Ashface	leave	than
the	issue	of	innocence,	stifled	earlier	by	the	boredom	brought	on	by	the	bard,
flared	up	again.	Leaving	officially	sanctioned	musings	behind,	the	students	again
bashed	their	faces	into	the	lad	and	the	guy,	and	all	that	had	been	real	slowly
turned	into	a	world	of	ideals,	oh,	let	me	dream	now,	let	me!	Syphon	did	not	take
part	in	the	dispute	but	just	sat,	coddling	himself—while	Pyzo	was	rallying
Syphon's	followers	and	Hopek	was	promoting	Kneadus'	cause.	And,	in	the	thick
and	stifling	air,	cheeks	flushed	again	and	controversy	grew—various	theories
and	the	names	of	doctrinaires	were	catapulted	and	sped	into	battle—here	world
views	grappled	with	each	other	high	above	hot heads,	there	a	troop	of	liberated
and	liberating	damsels	charged	at	the	obscurantism	of	the	conservative	press
with	the	vehemence	of	sexual	neophytes.	"Our	nationalism!	Bolshevism!
Fascism!	Catholic	Youth!	Falcons!	Boy	Scouts!	Be	prepared!	Knights	of	the
Sword!	Ancient	tribes	of	Poland!"—and	ever	more	fanciful	words	were	falling.
It	was	obvious	that	each	political	party	had	stuffed	the	students'	heads	with	its
brand	of	the	ideal	boy,	and	on	top	of	that,	individual	thinkers	had	loaded	them
with	their	own	tastes	and	ideals,	while	films,	romantic	novels,	and	newspapers
had	also	done	their	job.	And	so	all	types	of	lad,	guy,	communist	youth,	athlete,
juvenile,	youngblood,	scoundrel,	aesthete,	philosopher,	and	skeptic	rose	into	the
air	above	the	battlefield	and,	red	with	anger,	spat	at	one	another,	while	from
below	one	could	hear	only	moans	and	groans	of	"You're	naive!"	"No,	it's	you
who	are	naive!"	Because	all	their	ideals,	without	exception,	were	narrow,
awkward,	constrained,	and	inept;	they	spat	them	out	in	the	heat	of	the	dispute,
then	recoiled	like	catapults,	scared	of	what	they	had	done	and	unable	to	retract
their	callow	words.	Having	totally	lost	touch	with	life	and	with	reality,	mangled
by	all	kinds	of	factions,	trends,	and	currents,	constantly	subjected	to	pedagogy,
surrounded	by	falsehood,	they	gave	vent	to	their	own	falsehood!	They	talked
through	their	hats!	Their	pathos	was	artificial,	their	lyricism	was	odious,	they
were	dreadful	in	their	sentimentalism,	inept	in	their	irony,	jest,	and	wit,
pretentious	in	their	flights	of	fancy,	repulsive	in	their	failures.	And	so	their	world
turned.	Turned	and	proliferated.	Treated	with	artifice,	how	else	could	they	be	but
artificial?	And	being	artificial	how	else	could	they	talk	but	in	ways	that	were
dishonorable?	Consequently	a	terrible	impotence	hung	in	the	stifling	air,	andwhat	had	been	real	slowly	turned	into	a	world	of	ideals,	while	Kopyrda	was	the
only	one	to	resist	being	sucked	in	by	it	all,	nonchalantly	tossing	his	nail	file	and
looking	at	his	legs	...
In	the	meantime,	Kneadus	stood	to	one	side	with	Mizdral,	getting	the	ropes
ready,	and	Mizdral,	trying	to	oblige,	took	off	his	suspenders.	Shivers	went	down
my	spine.	If	Kneadus	were	to	carry	out	his	plan	of	initiating	Syphon	through	the
ears,	then	indeed—	reality	.	.	.	reality	would	turn	into	a	nightmare,	freakishness
would	take	over,	and	escape	would	become	impossible.	One	had	to	take	action
against	all	this,	at	any	cost.	But	how	could	I	act	alone,	against	all	of	them,	and
with	my	toe	still	stuck	in	my	shoe?	No,	I	could	not.	Oh,	give	me	a	single	face
that's	still	uncontorted!	I	approached	Kopyrda.	He	stood	by	the	window,	in	his
flannel	pants,	looking	at	the	school	yard	and	whistling	through	his	teeth,	and	I
thought	at	least	he	would	not	be	harboring	any	ideals.	But	how	was	I	to	begin?
"They	want	to	violate	Syphon,"	I	said	simply.	"It	would	be	better	to	dissuade
them	from	it.	If	Kneadus	violates	Syphon,	the	school	atmosphere	will	become
completely	unbearable."
And	I	anxiously	waited	for	the	sound,	the	ring	of	Kopyrda's	voice	...	But	he	did
not	say	a	word,	and	with	his	legs	straight,	just	as	he	stood,	he	jumped	out	the
window	and	into	the	yard.	Once	in	the	yard	he	went	on	whistling	through	his
teeth.
I	was	left	there,	totally	bewildered.	What	happened?	He	ducked	my	question.
Why	did	he	jump	instead	of	answering	me?	This	was	not	normal.	And	why	legs
—why	had	his	legs	come	to	the	fore,	to	the	forefront?	His	legs	were	on	his
forehead.	I	rubbed	my	forehead	with	my	hand.	Was	I	dreaming?	Or	was	this
real?	But	there	was	no	time	to	think.	Kneadus	jumped	toward	me.	Only	now	did
I	realize	that,	standing	nearby,	he	had	overheard	what	I	said	to	Kopyrda.
"Why	are	you	butting	in?"	he	yelled.	"Who	gave	you	permission	to	talk	to
Kopyrda	about	our	business?	He	doesn't	care!	Don't	you	dare	talk	to	him	about
me!"
I	took	a	step	back.	He	exploded	with	the	most	awful	invectives.
I	whispered	pleadingly:
"Kneadus,	don't	do	it	to	Syphon."
No	sooner	did	I	say	that	when	he	exploded	again:
"He	is	a	pain	in	the	ass	and	so	are	you,	with	all	due	respect!"
"Don't	do	it,"	I	begged	him.	"Don't	get	mixed	up	in	this!	Can	you	see	yourself
doing	it?	Listen,	just	imagine	it!	Look!	Here	is	Syphon,	on	the	ground,	all	tiedup,	and	you're	initiating	him—by	force,	through	the	ears!	Can	you	see	yourself
doing	it?"
He	twisted	his	face	even	more	hideously	and	said:
"I	see	that	you're	quite	a	lad	yourself!	Syphon	has	pulled	you	into	his	camp	too!
Your	'lad'	is	also	a	pain	in	the	ass,	with	all	due	respect!"
And	he	kicked	me	in	the	shin.
I	searched	for	words,	which,	as	usual,	failed	me.
"Kneadus,"	I	whispered,	"drop	it	.	.	.	You're	making	an	ass	of	yourself	too.	Does
Syphon's	innocence	entitle	you	to	depravity?	Drop	it."
He	looked	at	me.
"What	is	it	you	want	from	me?"	he	asked.
"Don't	make	a	fool	of	yourself	!"
"A	fool?"	he	mumbled,	his	eyes	became	misty.	"Stop	making	a	fool	of	myself,"
he	went	on	wistfully.	"Indeed,	there	are	guys	who	don't	make	fools	of
themselves.	There	are	guys—journeymen,	farmhands,	sons	of	caretakers—these
guys	cart	water,	sweep	the	streets	...	They	must	really	laugh	at	Syphon	and	me,	at
all	our	poppycock!"	He	fell	into	one	of	his	pained	musings,	for	a	moment	he
abandoned	trifling	talk	and	uncouth	mannerisms,	his	face	relaxed.	But	suddenly
he	jumped	as	if	burned	with	a	red hot	poker.	"Oh,	what	a	pupa!	A	pupa!"	he
exclaimed.	"No,	I	won't	have	it,	I	won't	have	the	students	taken	for	innocents.	I
have	to	rape	Syphon	through	the	ears!	F	.	.	.	f...	f...	!"	And	his	face	twisted	again
into	a	disgusting	grimace,	he	splattered	a	ton	of	filth—I	had	to	take	a	step	back.
"Kneadus,"	I	mechanically	whispered,	horrified,	"let's	run	away,	let's	run	from
here!"
"Run?"
His	ears	were	up.	He	stopped	spluttering	and	looked	at	me	inquisitively.	He
looked	more	normal	now—I	seized	on	this	like	a	drowning	man	would	clutch	at
a	straw.
"Let's	run,	Kneadus,	run	away,"	I	went	on	whispering,	"drop	it,	let's	run!"
He	hesitated,	his	face	sagging	with	indecision.	I	realized	that	the	thought	of
escape	was	having	a	positive	effect,	and,	trembling	with	fear	lest	he	resume	his
freakishness,	I	desperately	searched	for	a	way	to	egg	him	on.
"Run!	To	freedom!	To	those	farmhands,	Kneadus!"
Aware	of	his	yearning	for	the	journeyman's	real	world	I	thought	I	could	bait	him
with	the	farmhand.	Oh,	I	couldn't	care	less	what	I	said,	I	just	wanted	to	keep	himaway	from	the	grotesqueness,	from	suddenly	contorting	his	face	again.	And
indeed,	his	eyes	began	to	sparkle,	and	he	gave	me	a	brotherly	poke	in	the	ribs.
"Would	you	like	to,	really?"	he	asked	softly,	intimately,	and	he	laughed	with	a
laughter	that	was	soft	and	pure.	I	too	laughed	softly.
"To	run	away,"	he	murmured,	"to	run...	To	the	farmhands...	To	those	real	guys
who	tend	their	horses	by	the	river,	who	bathe	..."
But	then	I	saw	something	terrible—something	new	had	come	over	his	face—a
longing,	a	kind	of	beauty	unique	to	a	schoolboy	running	away	to	farmhands.	He
switched	from	brutality	to	musicality.	Taking	me	for	one	of	his	own	he	stopped
acting,	and	instead	he	gave	vent	to	his	yearnings	and	lyricism.
"Hey,	hey,"	he	sang	softly,	"hey,	to	eat	black	bread	with	farmhands,	to	ride
horses	bareback	over	a	meadow..."
His	lips	parted	with	a	strange	and	bitter	smile,	his	body	turned	supple	and
slender,	and	a	kind	of	self betrayal	settled	on	his	back	and	shoulders.	He	turned
into	a	schoolboy	longing	for	the	freedom	of	farmhands—and	now,	quite	openly,
and	throwing	all	caution	to	the	wind,	he	flashed	his	teeth	at	me.	I	took	a	step
back.	I	found	myself	in	an	awful	predicament.	Should	I	flash	my	teeth	in	return?
If	I	didn't	flash,	he	was	likely	to	start	spitting	and	swearing	again,	but	what	if	I
did	flash	.	..	wouldn't	the	flashing	make	things	worse,	wouldn't	the	clandestine
beauty	that	he	proffered	here	be	even	more	grotesque	than	his	ugliness?	Damn	it,
damn,	why	did	I	induce	him	to	dream	about	the	farmhand?	I	decided	against
flashing	my	teeth,	I	pursed	my	lips	instead	and	whistled	softly,	and	so	we	stood
facing	each	other,	flashing,	whistling,	or	laughing	softly,	while	the	whole	world
seemed	to	have	broken	down	and	reorganized	itself	in	the	mode	of	a	flashing,
fleeing	boy,	when	suddenly,	a	derisive	roar	came	from	a	few	steps	away	and	all
around	us!	I	took	a	step	back.	It	was	Syphon	and	Pyzo,	together	with	half	a
dozen	other	Syphonists—they	were	clutching	their	innocent	bellies,	chortling
and	roaring,	an	indulgent	yet	sneering	expression	on	their	faces.
"What?!"	exclaimed	Kneadus,	caught	with	his	pants	down.	It	was	too	late.
Pyzo	bellowed:
"Ha,	ha,	ha!"
While	Syphon	shouted:
"Congratulations,	Kneadalski!	Now	we	know	what's	going	on!	We've	caught
you,	my	friend,	with	your	pants	down!	So	you're	hankering	after	a	farmhand,	are
you?!	You'd	like	to	go	trotting	with	a	farmhand	over	a	meadow,	would	you?!
You	pretend	to	be	a	realist,	a	brute,	you	fight	the	idealism	of	others,	while	deepdown	you're	a	sentimentalist	yourself.	A	farmhand	sentimentalist!"
Mizdral	spewed	vulgarities	as	best	he	knew	how:	"Shut	up!	Son	of	a	bitch!	Shit!
Damn!"—but	it	was	too	late.	Not	even	the	worst	invectives	could	save	Kneadus,
caught	
in	flagranti	
with	his	secret	longings.	He	blushed	blood red	while	Syphon
sneered	triumphantly:	"He	fights	the	idealism	of	others,	yet	pulls	beguiling	faces
at	farmhands.	Now	we	know	why	purity	gets	in	his	way!"
Kneadus	was	about	to	pounce	on	Syphon—but	he	didn't	pounce.	He	was	about
to	crush	him	with	hyper vulgar	invectives,	but	he	didn't	crush	him.	Caught	as	he
was	
in	flagranti	
he	couldn't—he	stiffened	and	became	cold	and	venomously
polite.
"I	see,	Syphon,"	he	rejoined	quasi nonchalantly,	but	mainly	to	gain	time,	"so	you
think	I'm	pulling	faces,	do	you?	And	don't	you	pull	faces?"
"I?"	replied	Syphon,	caught	off guard,	"not	at	farmhands,	I	don't."
"Only	at	ideals,	eh?	So	I'm	not	supposed	to	pull	faces	at	farmhands,	but	it's	all
right	for	you	to	do	it,	because	you	pull	fancy	faces	at	ideals,	is	that	it?	Be	so	kind
as	to	look	at	me.	I'd	love	to	see	your	face,	if	it's	not	too	much	bother."
"What	for?"	Syphon	asked	anxiously,	and	he	took	out	his	handkerchief,	but
Kneadus	grabbed	it	from	him	and	flung	it	to	the	floor:	"What	for?	Because	I
can't	stand	the	sight	of	your	face!	Stop	putting	on	those	pure	and	noble	airs!	I
see,	so	it's	all	right	for	you	to	do	it,	is	it?...	Stop	it,	I	tell	you,	or	I'll	screw	up	my
face	so	horribly	that	you'll	be	sick	of	it	all—sick	of	it...	wait	till	I	show	you...	I'll
show	you	..."
"Show	me	what?"	Syphon	asked.	But	Kneadus	went	on	ranting	and	raving
feverishly:	"I'll	show	you!	I'll	show	you!	You	show	me,	and	I'll	show	you!
Enough	talk,	on	with	it,	show	us	that	lad	of	yours	instead	of	talking	about	him,
and	I'll	show	you	something	too,	and	then	we'll	see	who	will	run!	Show	me!
Show	me!	Enough	empty	phrases,	enough	half baked,	timid	airs,	those	little	airs,
to	hell	with	those	delicate,	maidenly	airs	that	we	hide	even	from	ourselves—
damn	it,	damn	it—I	challenge	you	to	pull	real	faces,	great	faces,	no holds barred
faces,	and	you'll	see,	I'll	show	you	faces	that	will	make	your	lad	run	with	his	tail
between	his	legs!	Enough	talk!	You	show	me,	show	me,	and	I'll	show	you	too!"
What	a	crazy	idea!	Kneadus	had	challenged	Syphon	to	a	face pulling	duel.	They
all	fell	silent	and	looked	at	him	as	if	he	had	lost	his	wits,	while	Syphon	was
thinking	up	all	kinds	of	sarcasms.	But	the	viciousness	that	spread	over
Kneadalski's	face	was	so	demonic	that	everyone	easily	grasped	the	deadly
sincerity	of	his	proposal.	Pulling	faces!	Faces—a	weapon	and	a	torture,	all	inone!	A	fight	with	no	holds	barred!	Some	of	the	students	shuddered,	seeing	that
Kneadalski	was	pulling	into	the	open	this	dreadful	tool	that,	up	to	now,	everyone
had	used	with	the	greatest	circumspection,	freely	and	openly	maybe	only	behind
closed	doors	and	in	front	of	a	mirror.	And	so	I	took	a	step	back	because	I
realized	that	Kneadus	was	at	the	end	of	his	wits,	gone	mad,	and	that	he	wanted	to
pull	those	horrible	faces	to	befoul	not	only	Syphon	and	the	lad,	but	also	the
farmhand,	the	guy,	himself,	me,	and	everything	else	besides!
"Got	cold	feet?"	he	asked	Syphon.
"Why	should	I	be	ashamed	of	my	ideals?"	the	latter	replied,	unable	to	hide	his
embarrassment.	"Why	should	I	be	afraid?"	but	his	voice	trembled	slightly.
"Well	then,	Syphon!	The	time—today,	after	school!	The	place here	in	this
classroom!	Name	your	seconds,	I	name	Mizdral	and	Hopek	as	my	seconds,	and
for	umpire	(here	Kneadus's	voice	became	even	more	diabolical),	for	umpire	I
propose	...	this	hew	fellow	who	just	arrived	in	school	today.	He'll	be	impartial."
What?	Me?	He	proposed	me	for	an	umpire?	Was	I	dreaming?	Or	was	this	real?
But	I	couldn't	be	an	umpire!	Of	course	I	couldn't!	I	didn't	even	want	to	watch
this!	I	didn't	want	to	see	it!	I	tried	to	protest,	but	the	general	anxiety	gave	way	to
such	an	excitement	that	they	all	started	screaming:	"Great!	It's	setded!	On	with
it!"	while	at	the	same	time	the	bell	rang,	a	little	man	with	a	short	beard	walked
into	the	classroom	and	sat	at	the	teacher's	podium.
It	was	the	same	body	that,	in	the	staff	room,	had	expressed	the	opinion	that
prices	had	gone	up,	an	exceptionally	friendly	little	old	man,	a	little	gray	dove
with	a	wart	on	his	nose.	He	took	out	the	grade	book,	and	a	deathly	silence	fell	in
the	classroom—he	beamed	as	he	looked	to	the	top	of	the	list,	and	everyone
whose	name	started	with	"A"	trembled—he	looked	to	the	bottom	of	the	list,	and
everyone	whose	name	started	with	"Z"	froze	in	fear.	Because	no	one	knew
anything	and,	caught	up	in	their	discussions,	they	had	forgotten	to	copy	the	Latin
translation—with	the	exception	of	Syphon,	who	had	already	prepared	his	lesson
at	home	and	could	deliver	anything,	whenever	called	upon,	while	others	could
not.	But	the	little	old	man,	totally	unaware	of	the	fear	he	was	arousing,
cheerfully	gazed	up	and	down	the	list	of	names,	hesitated,	reflected,	bantered
inwardly,	then	finally	said	with	confidence:
"Slopowski."
But	it	soon	became	apparent	that	Slopowski	couldn't	translate	Caesar,	which	was
the	assignment	for	today,	and,	worse	still,	he	did	not	know	that	
animis	oblatis
was	in	the	
ablativus	absolutus."Oh,	Master	Slopowski,"	the	gentle	old	man	said	with	genuine	reproach,	"you
don't	know	what	
animis	oblatis	
means,	nor	do	you	know	its	grammatical
construction?	Why	don't	you	know	it?"	And,	truly	upset,	he	gave	him	an	F,	but
then	he	beamed	again,	and	with	a	renewed	surge	of	trust	he	called	on	"K"—
Koperdillski,	in	the	belief	that	by	singling	him	out	he	was	bestowing	happiness,
and,	with	looks	and	gestures	full	of	the	deepest	trust,	he	egged	him	on	to	noble
rivalry.	But	neither	Koperdillski	nor	Kotecki	nor	Kabbaginski	nor	Kodowel	had
any	idea	what	
animis	oblatis	
meant,	they	would	go	up	to	the	blackboard	and
stand	there,	sulking,	glum	and	silent,	whereupon	the	little	old	man	would	express
his	fleeting	disappointment	with	a	brisk	gesture,	then,	as	if	he	had	only	yesterday
arrived	from	the	moon,	from	some	other	world,	and,	with	a	renewed	upsurge	of
trust,	he	would	again	call	upon	someone	else,	each	time	expecting	that	the
student,	thus	blessed	and	favored,	would	duly	respond	to	his	call.	But	no	one	did.
He	had	already	marked	close	to	ten	F's	on	the	record	sheet,	and	he	still	had	not
realized	that	everyone	was	trying	to	stave	off	his	trust	with	a	cold	and	deathly
fear,	that	no	one	wanted	all	that	trust—oh,	he	was	such	an	extremely	trusting
little	old	man!	And	there	was	no	remedy	for	all	that	trust!	They	tried	in	vain	all
means	of	persuasion,	they	presented	sick notes,	excuses,	ailments—to	no	avail,
the	teacher	went	on	talking	with	compassion	and	understanding.
"What	do	you	mean,	Master	Bobkowski!	For	reasons	beyond	your	control	you
couldn't	prepare	your	lesson?	Well,	don't	worry,	I'll	ask	you	something	from	a
previous	text.	What?	You	have	a	little	bit	of	a	headache?	Great,	I	have	just	the
thing	for	you,	the	interesting	maxim	
de	malis	capitis.	
Now	what—you	have	an
urgent	need	to	go	to	the	bathroom?	Oh,	Master	Bobkowski!	What's	your	point?
The	ancients	have	done	it	already!	Let	me	show	you	the	famous	
passus	
from
book	five,	where	Caesar's	whole	army,	having	eaten	spoiled	carrots,	succumbed
to	the	same	fate	as	you.	The	whole	army,	Bobkowski!	Why	bother	with	such	a
feeble	attempt	when	you	already	have	at	hand	a	brilliant	and	classic	description!
These	books,	gentlemen,	are	life,	life	itself!"
Syphon	and	Kneadus	were	forgotten,	the	quarreling	had	stopped—	everyone
tried	to	cease	to	exist,	to	be	no	more,	the	students	shrank,	faded,	and	sank	into
the	background,	they	pulled	in	their	stomachs,	hands,	and	legs,	but	not	one
student	was	bored,	boredom	was	out	of	the	question,	because	now	each	and
every	one	of	them	was	scared,	and,	in	pained	fear,	grimly	awaited	his	turn	to	be
caught	by	the	call	of	the	childlike	trust	that	had	grazed	on	texts.	And	their	faces
—as	faces	are	wont	to	do	under	stress	and	panic—turned	into	shadows,	into
illusions,	until	it	was	impossible	to	tell	what	was	more	insane,	unreal,	chimeric—their	faces,	the	unfathomable	
accusativs	cum	infinitivo,	
or	the	hellish	trust	of	a
deluded	old	man	and	what	had	been	real	slowly	turned	into	a	world	of	ideals,	oh,
let	me	dream	now,	let	me!
The	teacher,	however,	having	given	Bobkowski	an	F	and	having	finally
exhausted	
animis	oblatis,	
dreamt	up	a	new	problem,	namely,	what	will	
passivum
futurum	conditionalis	
be	in	the	third	person	plural	of	the	reflexive	verb	
colleo,
colleavi,	colleatum,	
and	now	this	new	idea	caught	his	fancy.
"An	amazing	thing!"	he	exclaimed	rubbing	his	hands,	"amazing	and	instructive
too!	Well,	gentlemen!	This	is	an	issue	replete	with	subtlety!	Here	is	a	fertile	field
for	showing	off	your	intellectual	prowess!	Because	if	
ollandus	sim	
derives	from
olleare	
then	.	.	.	yes,	then,	then	.	.	.	gentlemen	.	.	."	but	the	gendemen	had
seemingly	disappeared,	terrified	out	of	existence.	"Right!	Well?	Well?	
Collan	.	.	.
collan
..."
No	one	said	a	word.	The	little	old	man,	still	brimming	with	hope,	went	on
repeating	his:	"yes,	yes"	and	
"collan,	collan,"	
he	beamed,	he	wooed	them	with
his	riddles,	he	encouraged	and	incited	them,	and—	as	best	he	knew	how—he
called	for	answers,	for	knowledge,	for	happiness	and	fulfillment.	But	suddenly
he	realized	that	no	one	wanted	any	of	it,	that	he	had	been	dancing	while	facing	a
blank	wall.	His	lights	dimmed,	and	in	a	hollow	voice	he	said:
"Collandus	sim!	Collandus	sim!"	
he	repeated	sadly,	and,	humiliated	by	the
silence,	he	added:	"How	is	it,	gentlemen?	Don't	you	appreciate	any	of	it?!	Can't
you	see	that	
collandus	sim	
develops	intelligence,	improves	the	mind,	builds
character,	perfects	us	in	everyway	and	bonds	us	with	ancient	thought?	Because,
mark	you,	if	
ollandus	
is	from	
olleare,	
then	clearly	
collandus	
is	from	
colleare,
because	
passivum	futurum	
of	the	third	conjugation	ends	in	
dus,	dus,	us,	
with	the
exception	of	the	exceptions.	
Us,	us,	us—
gentlemen!	There	is	nothing	more
logical	than	a	language	in	which	everything	that's	illogical	is	an	exception!	
Us,
us,	us,	
gentlemen,"	he	ended	despondently,	"what	a	great	factor	in	evolution!"	At
that	moment	Galkiewicz	jumped	to	his	feet	and	groaned:	"Evolution,
shmolution!	How	can	it	develop	anything	when	it	develops	nothing?	How	can	it
perfect	anything	when	it	perfects	nothing?	How	can	it	build	something	when	it
doesn't	build	anything?	O	God,	O	God O	God,	O	God!"
Teacher	"What's	this,	Master	Galkiewicz?	The	suffix	
us	
does	not	perfect	you?
You're	telling	me	that	this	suffix	does	not	perfect	you?	That	the	suffix	
passivi
futuri	
of	the	third	conjugation	does	not	enrich	you?	Come,	come,	Galkiewicz!"
Galkiewicz	"That	little	tail	ending	does	not	enrich	me!	That	little	tail	does	notperfect	me!	Not	in	the	least!	O	God!	O	God!"
Teacher	"What	do	you	mean—doesn't	enrich	you?	Master	Galkiewicz,	when	I
say	it	enriches	you,	it	most	certainly	does!	And	I'm	telling	you	it	does	enrich
you!	Trust	me,	Galkiewicz!	Of	course	an	ordinary	mind	cannot	grasp	these	great
benefits!	In	order	to	grasp	them	one	has	to,	after	years	of	extensive	studies,	first
become	an	extraordinary	mind	oneself!	For	Christ's	sake,	in	the	course	of	the
past	year	we've	covered	seventy three	poems	from	Caesar,	and	in	these	poems
Caesar	describes	how	he	positioned	his	cohorts	on	a	hillock.	Those	seventy three
poems,	just	the	words	themselves,	haven't	they	mysteriously	revealed	to	you,
Galkiewicz,	all	the	riches	of	antiquity?	Haven't	they	taught	you	its	style,	its
clarity	of	thought,	its	precision	of	expression,	and	its	art	of	war?"
Galkiewicz	"Nothing!	Nothing!	No	art.	I'm	just	scared	of	an	F.	That's	all	I'm
scared	of!	Oh,	I	can't,	I	can't!"
Generalized	inability	was	now	threatening	everyone.	The	teacher	realized	that	it
was	threatening	him	too,	and,	worse	still,	if	he	did	not	redouble	his	trust	to
counter	his	own	sudden	lack	of	trust	and	will,	he	too	would	perish.	Abandoned
by	all—"Pylaszczkiewicz!"—	exclaimed	the	hermit	in	despair,	"You,	Syphon
Pylaszczkiewicz,	recapitulate	at	once	the	gains	we've	made	in	the	last	three
months	by	revealing	to	us	the	full	depth	of	thought	and	the	delights	of	style,	and
—yes,	I	do	trust,	I	do,	Jesus,	Mary,	I	do	trust!"
Syphon,	always	ready—as	mentioned	before—and	able	on	demand,	stood	up,
and	with	great	ease	and	fluency	began:
The	following	day,	having	gathered	his	troops,	Caesar	chastised	them	for	their
hot headedness	and	greed,	and,	surmising	that	they	had	used	their	own
judgment,	their	own	preconception	as	to	where	they	should	go	and	what	they
should	do,	and	that	they	had	decided,	after	the	orders	to	retreat	were	given,	that
they	would	not	he	held	hack	by	any	military	tribunes	or	envoys,	he	explained	to
them	the	significance	of	an	unfavorable	site,	such	as	Avaricum,	where	an
otherwise	assured	victory	eluded	him	even	though	he	had	seized	the	enemy
without	their	leader	and	without	their	cavalry,	and	that	they	had,	nonetheless,
sustained	major	losses	because	the	site	was	unfavorable.	The	spirit	of	those	who
will	not	be	deterred	by	the	fortifications	of	a	camp,	the	height	of	mountains,	or
the	walls	of	a	city	is	to	be	much	admired,	but	by	the	same	token	one	has	to
condemn	the	undue	willfulness	and	audacity	of	those	who	think	they	know	more
about	victory	and	the	outcome	of	things	than	their	leader	does,	and	in	a	soldier
one	wishes	for	modesty	and	restraint	no	less	than	for	bravery	and	nobility	ofmind.	Then,	as	he	kept	advancing,	he	made	the	decision	and	ordered	the	bugles
to	sound	retreat	so	that	ten	legions	would	at	once	desist	from	battle,	and	this	was
carried	out,	but	the	soldiers	in	the	remaining	legions	did	not	hear	the	sound	of
the	bugles	because	they	were	separated	from	the	rest	by	a	wide	valley.	Therefore
military	tribunes	and	envoys	tried	to	call	them	back,	as	had	been	ordered	by
Caesar,	but	the	soldiers	were	so	excited	by	the	prospect	of	victory,	of
overpowering	their	enemy	in	his	flight	in	the	course	of	a	propitious	battle,	all	of
which	they	could	achieve	through	bravery	and	without	resorting	to	flight,	that
they	did	not	stop	till	they	were	at	the	walls	and	the	gates	of	the	city,	then	shouts
were	heard	in	all	parts	of	the	city,	whereupon	those	terrified	by	the	sudden
uproar	thought	that	the	enemy	was	within	the	gates,	and	started	running	out	of
the	city.
"Collandus	sim,	
gentlemen!	
Collandus	sim!	
What	clarity,	what	language!	What
depth,	what	thought!	
Collandus	sim,	
what	a	repository	of	wisdom!	Oh,	I	can
breathe	again,	I	can	breathe!	
Collandus	sim	
forever	and	ever,	to	the	very	end
collandus	sim,	collandus	sim,	collandus	sim,	collandus	sim,	collandus	sim
—
suddenly	the	bell	rang,	and	the	students	screamed	wildly,	the	little	old	man
gave	a	look	of	surprise	and	walked	out.
At	the	same	moment,	abandoning	these	officially	sanctioned	musings,	they	all
bashed	full face	into	their	own	private	musings	about	the	lad,	the	guy,
discussions	flared	up	again,	and,	what	had	been	real	slowly	turned	into	a	world
of	ideals,	oh,	let	me	dream	now,	let	me!	Kneadus	had	deliberately	summoned	me
to	be	the	umpire!	He	did	it	deliberately!	So	that	I	would	have	to	watch,	so	that	I
would	have	to	see	it.	His	mind	was	set—by	befouling	himself	he	wanted	to
befoul	me	too,	he	could	not	bear	the	fact	that	I	had	been	instrumental	in
revealing	his	momentary	weakness	for	the	farmhand.	But	how	could	I	risk
exposing	my	own	face?	I	knew	that	if	I	became	part	of	this	aping,	my	own	face
would	never	return	to	normal,	my	chance	of	escape	would	be	lost	forever,	no,	no,
let	them	carry	on	however	they	want,	but	without	me,	without	me!	Nervously
wiggling	my	toe	in	my	shoe	I	caught	his	sleeve,	I	looked	at	him	imploringly	and
whispered:
"Kneadus..."
He	pushed	me	away.
"Oh	no,	kiddo!	That	won't	do!	You	are	the	umpire,	and	that's	that!"
He	called	me	"kiddo"!	What	a	disgusting	word!	It	was	sheer	cruelty	on	his	part,	I
realized	that	everything	was	lost,	and	that	we	were	heading	full steam	towardthat	which	I	dreaded	most,	toward	utter	freakishness	and	grotesqueness.
Meanwhile,	even	those	who	had	until	now	been	listlessly	repeating	"Could
Syphonus	perchance	.	.	."	were	seized	with	a	wild	and	sick	curiosity.	Nostrils
flaring,	cheeks	burning	red,	it	was	clear	that	the	face pulling	duel	would	indeed
be	a	duel	with	no	holds	barred,	unto	death,	and	not	merely	a	duel	of	empty
words!	They	surrounded	the	two	contestants	and	shouted	into	the	heavily	laden
air:
"Go	ahead!	Stick	it	to	him!	Get	on	with	it!	Go	for	it!"
Only	Kopyrda	calmly	stretched	himself,	picked	up	his	notes,	and	walked	away
on	those	legs	of	his...
And	Syphon	sat	on	that	lad	of	his—all	gloom	and	doom,	as	puffed	up	as	a	hen
sitting	on	eggs—one	could	see	that	he	was	actually	a	little	scared	and	would
have	preferred	to	back	out!	Pyzo,	however,	swiftly	recognized	what	terrific
chances	Syphon's	lofty	beliefs	and	principles	gave	him.	"We've	got	him!"	he
whispered	into	Syphon's	ear	to	spur	him	on.	"Don't	be	yellow!	Think	of	your
principles!	You	have	your	principles,	and	for	the	sake	of	these	principles	as	such,
you'll	easily	be	able	to	pull	faces,	any	number	of	them,	while	he	has	no
principles,	and	he'll	have	to	pull	faces	for	his	own	sake,	and	not	for	the	sake	of
principles,	as	such."	As	a	result	of	these	whisperings	Syphon's	face	began	to
relax	and	soon	to	glow	peacefully,	because	his	principles	were	indeed
empowering	him	to	pull	any	number	of	faces,	at	any	time.	Mizdral	and	Hopek
saw	what	was	happening	and,	taking	Kneadus	aside,	begged	him	not	to	risk
certain	defeat.
"Don't	bring	ruin	on	yourself	and	on	all	of	us,	better	surrender	right	now—he's
much	better	at	pulling	faces	than	you	are—pretend,	Kneadie,	that	you're	sick,
pass	out,	it'll	blow	over,	we'll	find	excuses	for	you!"
But	Kneadus	merely	answered:
"I	can't,	the	die	is	cast!	Off	with	you!	Off!	Do	you	want	me	to	chicken	out?	Get
those	gawkers	out	of	here!	They're	getting	on	my	nerves!	No	one	is	to	watch	me
from	the	side	except	the	seconds	and	the	umpire."	But	his	face	fell,	and	his	initial
doggedness	gave	way	to	obvious	stage	fright,	which	contrasted	with	Syphon's
calm	self confidence	so	starkly	that	Mizdral	whispered:	"He's	done	for,"	and	the
others	shuddered	and	slipped	out	of	the	classroom	in	silence,	closing	the	door
carefully	behind	them.	Suddenly	we	found	ourselves	in	the	deserted	classroom,
behind	closed	doors,	the	seven	of	us,	Syphon	Pylaszczkewicz	and	Kneadus,
Mizdral,	Hopek,	Pyzo,	someone	called	Guzek	(Syphon's	other	second),	and	ofcourse	myself	in	the	middle	as	the	superarbiter,	as	the	dumbfounded	superarbiter
of	all	arbiters.	And	now	Pyzo's	voice	resounded,	sarcastic	and	awe inspiring,
and,	looking	slightly	pale,	he	read	the	conditions	of	the	engagement	from	a	piece
of	paper:
The	contestants	shall	stand	facing	each	other	and	shall	fire	a	salvo	of	faces,	and
to	each	and	every	one	of	Pylaszczkiewicz's	inspiring	and	beatific	faces,
Kneadalski	shall	respond	with	an	ugly	and	demolishing	counterface.	The	faces—
as	personal	as	possible,	totally	individual,	and	intrinsically	his	own,	as
wounding	and	shattering	as	possible
—
shall	be	administered	without	a	silencer,
to	the	very	end.
He	fell	silent—while	Syphon	and	Kneadus	took	up	their	assigned	positions,
Syphon	rubbed	his	cheeks,	Kneadus	slid	his	jaw	from	side	to	side—then	Mizdral
said	through	his	chattering	teeth:
"You	may	begin!"
And	just	as	he	said	"you	may	begin,"	just	at	that	moment	when	he	said	"begin,"
reality	finally	overstepped	its	bounds,	all	that	was	nonessential	climaxed	into	a
nightmare,	and	the	outlandish	event	turned	into	a	total	dream—while	I	was	stuck
there	in	the	middle	like	a	fly	caught	in	a	web,	unable	to	move.	It	seemed	as	if	by
way	of	long	and	hard	exercise,	the	point	at	which	one	loses	one's	face	had	finally
been	reached.	The	empty	phrase	became	a	grimace,	and	the	grimace vacuous,
sterile,	idle,	and	futile—grabbed	one	and	would	not	let	go.	It	wouldn't	have	been
at	all	strange	to	see	Kneadus	and	Syphon	take	their	faces	in	their	hands	and
throw	them	at	each	other—no,	nothing	would	have	been	strange	any	more.	I
mumbled:	"Have	pity	on	your	faces,	at	least	have	pity	on	mine,	a	face	is	not	an
object,	a	face	is	a	subject,	a	subject,	a	subject!"	But	Syphon	had	already
presented	and	sallied	his	first	face	so	violently	that	even	my	face	curled	on	itself
like	a	piece	of	gutta percha.
{6}
	Namely—he	blinked	like	someone	coming	out	of
darkness	into	broad	daylight,	he	then	looked	right	and	left	in	pious	astonishment,
rolled	his	eyeballs,	shot	them	upward,	ogled,	opened	his	mouth,	let	out	a	soft	cry
as	if	he	had	spotted	something	on	the	ceiling,	assumed	an	expression	of	rapture
and	so	remained,	entranced	and	inspired;	he	then	placed	his	hand	on	his	heart
and	sighed.
Kneadalski	shrank,	crouched,	and	hit	him	from	below	with	a	shattering,	copycat
counterface	as	follows:	he	too	rolled	his	eyeballs,	lifted	them	and	ogled,	he	too
opened	his	mouth	in	calflike	rapture,	and,	his	face	thus	prepared,	he	moved	it	in
circles	till	a	fly	fell	into	his	gaping	mouth;	he	then	ate	it.Syphon	paid	no	attention	to	him,	as	if	Kneadus'	pantomime	was	not	even	taking
place	(because	he	had	the	advantage	of	acting	for	the	sake	of	his	principles,	as
such,	and	not	for	his	own	sake),	but	instead	he	burst	into	fervent,	ardent	sobs,
and	he	sobbed	and	sobbed	until	he	reached	the	peak	of	contrition,	self revelation,
and	emotion.	Kneadus	also	began	sobbing,	and	he	sobbed	long	and	hard	till	a
drop	of	snot	appeared	at	the	tip	of	his	nose—which	he	shook	off	into	a	spittoon,
thereby	reaching	another	peak	of	grossness.	But	the	impudent	blasphemy	against
all	sacred	feelings	unnerved	Syphon—he	couldn't	stand	it	any	longer	and	he
unwittingly	glanced	at	Kneadus,	then,	exasperated	by	what	he	saw	and	still
sobbing,	he	looked	daggers	at	the	daredevil!	How	unwise!	Because	Kneadus	was
ready	for	him!	As	soon	as	he	realized	that	he	had	managed	to	turn	Syphon's	gaze
toward	himself	and	away	from	lofty	heights,	he	immediately	bared	his	teeth	and
pulled	a	face	so	filthy	that	Syphon,	cut	to	the	quick,	hissed.	It	seemed	that	now
Kndeadus	had	the	upper	hand!	Mizdral	and	Hopek	breathed	a	quiet	sigh!	But	too
soon!	They	breathed	too	soon!
Because	Syphon—realizing	in	the	nick	of	time	that	he	had	needlessly	been
carried	away	by	Kneadus'	face,	and	that	in	his	exasperation	he	was	about	to	lose
command	of	his	own	face—quickly	retreated,	regrouped	his	features,	and	once
again	shot	his	eyeballs	upward,	moreover,	he	moved	one	of	his	legs	forward,
slightly	tousled	his	hair,	letting	a	cowlick	slip	onto	his	forehead,	and	so	he
remained,	complete	unto	himself,	with	his	principles	and	with	his	ideals;	he	then
lifted	his	hand	and	quite	unexpectedly	pointed	his	finger	upward!	The	blow	was
staggering!
Kneadus	immediately	stuck	out	the	same	finger	and	spat	on	it,	he	picked	his
nose	with	it,	he	scratched	himself	with	it,	he	debased	Syphon	as	much	as	he
could,	as	he	knew	how,	he	defended	himself	by	attacking,	he	attacked	by
defending	himself,	but	Syphon's	finger	remained	pointing	to	heaven	on	high,
undaunted.	To	no	avail	did	Kneadus	bite	his	finger,	dig	his	teeth	into	it,	scratch
the	sole	of	his	foot	with	it,	and	everything	else	humanly	possible	to	befoul	it—
alas,	alas—Syphon's	unrelenting,	undaunted	finger	remained	pointing	upward,
and	would	not	cede.	Kneadalski	found	himself	in	desperate	straits	because	he
had	exhausted	all	possible	grossness	while	Syphon's	finger	continued	pointing
upward,	on	and	on.	The	seconds'	and	the	umpire's	blood	curdled!	With	a	final,
spasmodic	effort	Kneadus	bathed	his	finger	in	the	spittoon	and,	red	in	the	face,
covered	in	sweat,	repulsive,	he	shook	it	at	Syphon	in	despair,	but	Syphon	paid	no
heed,	nor	did	he	move	his	finger,	and	what's	more,	his	face	turned	as	luminous	as
a	rainbow	after	a	storm,	and	the	wondrous	Eaglet 
Sokot
,	the	pure,	innocent,uninitiated	Lad,	beamed	in	all	of	the	seven	colors	of	the	rainbow!
"Victory!"	shouted	Pyzo.
Kneadus	looked	terrible.	He	retreated	all	the	way	to	the	wall	and	wheezed,	let
out	a	throaty	rattle,	foamed	at	the	mouth,	grabbed	his	finger	and	pulled	on	it,	he
wanted	to	tear	it	out,	to	tear	it	out	by	its	root	and	throw	it	away,	to	destroy
thereby	any	bond	with	Syphon	and	regain	his	independence!	But	he	couldn't,	no
matter	how	hard	he	pulled,	regardless	of	the	pain!	Inability	reared	its	head	again!
While	Syphon	always	could,	always	at	the	ready	and	as	calm	as	the	blue	Skies,
his	finger	uplifted	not	for	Kneadus,	as	such,	nor	for	himself,	as	such,	but	for	his
principles,	as	such!	Oh,	what	horror!	Here	in	one	direction	was	Kneadus—
contorted,	baring	his	teeth,	and	there	was	Syphon	doing	it	in	the	opposite
direction!	And	there	was	I	between	them,	the	umpire,	imprisoned	perhaps
forever,	a	prisoner	of	someone	else's	grimace,	someone	else's	countenance.	And
my	own	face,	like	a	mirror	image	of	their	faces,	also	turned	freakish,	while	fear,
disgust,	and	terror	carved	on	it	an	indelible	mark.	A	clown	between	two	clowns,
how	could	I	attempt	anything	that	would	not	be	a	grimace?	My	toe	tragically
seconding	their	fingers,	I	was	grimacing,	grimacing,	and	I	knew	that	I	was	losing
myself	in	that	grimace.	I	thought	I	would	never	escape	Pimko.	Never	be	myself
again.	Oh,	what	horror!	And	what	horrible	silence!	Because	at	times	the	silence
was	absolute,	no	weapons	clanging,	only	face pulling,	and	movements	without	a
sound.
Suddenly	Kneadus	shrieked:
"Hold	him!	Grab	him!	Kill	him!	Hit	him!"
What's	this?	Something	new	again?	What	now?	Hasn't	there	been	enough
already?	Kneadus	lowered	his	finger,	pounced	on	Syphon,	and	hit	him	in	the
mug—Mizdral	and	Hopek	pounced	on	Pyzo	and	Guzek,	and	hit	them	in	the
mugs	too!	A	tumult	ensued.	The	mass	of	bodies	lay	entangled	on	the	floor	while
I	stood	over	them	immobile,	like	some	superumpire.	In	less	than	a	minute	Pyzo
and	Guzek	were	on	the	floor	like	two	logs,	tied	up	in	suspenders,	while	Kneadus
sat	akimbo	Syphon's	chest,	gloating	horribly.
"What	now,	you	little	worm,	you	innocent	Lad,	you	thought	you	had	the	better	of
me?	Up	goes	your	little	finger,	and	you're	pleased	as	Punch,	eh?	So	you	thought,
you	mama's	boy	(and	he	followed	this	with	the	most	opprobrious	expressions),
that	Kneadus	wouldn't	be	able	to	handle	this?	That	he'd	let	you	twist	him	round
your	little	finger?	I	have	news	for	you:	if	nothing	else	works,	that	little	finger
will	be	pulled	down	by	force!""Let	go	..."	Syphon	rattled	with	a	throaty	voice.
"Let	go!?	I'll	let	go	in	a	minute!	But	I'm	not	sure	I'll	let	you	go	just	as	you	are.
Let's	talk	first!	Let's	have	your	little	ear!	Fortunately,	one	can	still	get	inside	you
...	by	force	.	.	.	through	the	ears	..	.	I'll	get	inside	you	all	right!	Give	me	your	little
ear,	I	tell	you!	Just	wait,	you	little	innocent,	I'll	tell	you	something	..."
He	bent	over	him	and	whispered—Syphon	turned	green,	squealed	like	a	stuck
pig,	and	plopped	like	a	fish	out	of	water.	Kneadus	pressed	down	on	him!	And,	in
hot	pursuit	of	Syphon's	ears,	Kneadus	chased	them	with	his	mouth,	first	one	ear
then	the	other,	while	Syphon	rolled	his	head	from	side	to	side	to	protect	his	ears,
but,	realizing	that	escape	was	impossible	he	started	to	roar,	and	he	roared	to
deafen	the	murderous	words	that	were	tearing	at	his	innocence,	he	roared
horribly,	grimly,	he	then	stiffened,	utterly	beside	himself	in	that	desperate,
primeval	roar,	and	I	could	not	believe	my	ears	that	ideals	could	roar	like	a	wild
ox	in	the	wilderness.	Then	his	torturer	roared	too:
"A	gag!	A	gag!	Gag	him!	You	there,	you	goat head!	What	are	you	gawking	at?	A
gag!	Use	your	handkerchief!"
He	was	screaming	at	me.	I	was	the	one	to	gag	him	with	my	handkerchief!
Because	Mizdral	and	Hopek,	sitting	akimbo	their	respective	seconds,	couldn't
move.	But	I	didn't	want	to!	I	couldn't!	I	stood	motionless,	and	to	move,	to	speak,
to	think	of	expressing	anything	whatsoever	filled	me	with	disgust.	Oh,	what	an
umpire!	Oh	where	was	my	thirty year old,	my	thirty year old,	where	was	my
thirty year old?	Nowhere!	And	all	of	a	sudden	Pimko	appears	at	the	door	of	the
classroom,	and	he	stands	there—in	his	yellow	buckskin	shoes,	in	his	brown	coat,
cane	in	hand—he	is	there,	standing	.	.	.	standing.	And	he	stands	there	as
absolutely	as	if	he	were	seated.4	Preface	to	"The	Child	Runs	Deep	in	Filidor"
Before	I	continue	these	true	reminiscences	I	wish	to	include,	as	the	next	chapter
and	by	way	of	digression,	a	story	entitled	"The	Child	Runs	Deep	in	Filidor."	You
saw	how	maliciously	the	doctrinaire	Pimko	had	dealt	me	the	pupa,	you	saw	the
idealistic	nooks	and	crannies	of	our	intelligentsia	youth,	their	inability	to
embrace	life,	the	hopelessness	of	their	disparate	aims,	their	dismal	affectation,
the	boredom	that	plunged	them	into	gloom,	their	ridiculous	fantasy	life,	their
anguish	over	their	anachronisms,	the	folly	of	their	pupas,	faces,	and	other	body
parts.	You	have	heard	words,	words,	vulgar	words	waging	war	on	high flown
words,	and	you	have	heard	other	equally	vacuous	words	uttered	in	class	by	their
teachers—you	were	the	silent	witnesses	to	the	way	that	a	mishmash	of	inane
words	came	to	a	bad	end	in	the	form	of	a	freakish	grimace.	It	is	in	the	prime	of
youth	that	man	sinks	into	empty	phrases	and	grimaces.	It's	in	this	smithy	that	our
maturity	is	forged.	In	a	moment	you'll	see	yet	another	reality,	another	duel—a
fight	unto	death	between	Professors	G.	L.	Filidor	from	Leyden	and	Momsen
from	Colombo	(with	the	genteel	title	of	"anti Filidor").	And	words,	as	well	as
various	body	parts,	will	play	their	part	in	that	reality,	but	one	should	not	look	for
an	exact	connection	between	the	two	parts	of	the	said	whole;	and	whoever	thinks
that	by	including	this	story,	"The	Child	Runs	Deep	in	Filidor,"	my	sole	aim	was
not	merely	filling	space	on	paper	and	reducing	slightly	the	enormous	number	of
white	pages	before	me,	is	sorely	mistaken.
But	if	notable	scholars	and	connoisseurs,	all	those	Pimkos	adept	at	fabricating
the	pupa	out	of	texts	by	pointing	to	the	faulty	construction	of	a	work	of	art,
reproach	me	that—in	their	opinion—a	desire	to	fill	space	is	a	purely	private
matter	and	insufficient	reason	for	writing,	and	that	one	shouldn't	stick	everything
one	has	ever	written	into	a	work	of	art,	I	will	reply	that	in	my	humble	opinion
individual	body	parts	form	an	adequately	aesthetic artistic	linkage	with	words.
And	I	will	prove	that	my	construction	is	in	no	way	inferior,	as	far	as	precision
and	logic	are	concerned,	to	even	the	most	precise	and	logical	constructions.
Look—that	basic	body	part,	the	tame	and	kindly	pupa	is	the	basis,	therefore,	it	is
from	the	pupa	that	all	action	begins.	It	is	from	the	pupa,	as	from	the	trunk	of	a
tree,	that	the	branching	of	individual	parts,	namely	the	toe,	hands,	eyes,	teeth,
ears,	begins,	and,	at	the	same	time,	all	those	parts	imperceptibly	pass	from	one
part	to	another	in	delicate	and	skillful	transformations.	And	the	human	face,
otherwise	known	as	the	mug,	is	the	crown,	the	foliage	of	a	tree	whose	individual
parts	grow	out	of	the	trunk	of	the	pupa;	the	mug	closes	the	cycle	that	began	withthe	pupa.	And	having	arrived	at	the	mug,	what	is	there	left	for	me	to	do	but	to
retrace	my	steps,	through	the	individual	parts,	back	to	the	pupa?—and	this	is	the
purpose	of	the	short	story	"Filidor."	"Filidor"	is	a	construction	in	reverse,	a
passage	or,	strictly	speaking,	a	coda,	it's	a	trill,	or	rather	a	twist,	a	twisting	of	the
gut,	without	which	I	would	never	have	reached	the	calf	of	my	,	left	leg.	Isn't	this
an	ironclad	skeleton	for	a	construction?	Isn't	this	enough	to	satisfy	the	most
exacting	requirements?	And	what	if	you	penetrate	deeper,	into	the	linkages
between	the	individual	parts,	into	the	pathways	from	the	finger	to	the	teeth,	into
the	mystical	meaning	of	some	of	your	favorite	parts,	and	further,	into	the
significance	of	individual	joints,	of	the	sum	of	the	parts,	as	well	as	into	all	the
parts	of	parts?	I	assure	you,	such	a	construction	is	invaluable	as	far	as	filling
space	is	concerned,	one	could	fill	three	hundred	volumes	with	critical	research
on	the	subject,	thus	filling	even	more	space,	reaching	thereby	an	even	higher
place,	and	seating	oneself	even	more	squarely	and	comfortably	in	that	place.	Do
you	like	blowing	soap	bubbles	by	the	lakeside	at	sunset	when	carp	splash	about
and	a	fisherman	sits	in	silence,	looking	at	himself	in	the	mirrorlike	sheet	of
water?
And	I	recommend	repetition	as	the	method	for	enhancing	the	vigor	of	your	work,
because	by	systematically	repeating	certain	words,	phrases,	situations,	and	parts
I	intensify	them,	thereby	heightening	the	impression	of	uniformity	of	style	to	the
point	of	near mania.	It's	by	means	of	repetition,	repetition	that	mythology	is
most	readily	created!	Take	note,	however,	that	this	construction	from	particles	is
not	a	mere	construction,	it	is	actually	an	entire	philosophy	which	I'll	present	here
in	the	frivolous	and	frothy	form	of	a	carefree	magazine	article.	But	what	do	you
think,	tell	me—in	your	opinion,	doesn't	the	reader	assimilate	parts	only,	and	only
partly	at	that?	He	reads	a	part,	or	a	piece	of	it,	then	stops,	only	to	resume	reading
another	piece	later,	and,	as	so	often	happens,	he	starts	from	the	middle	or	from
the	end,	then	backtracks	to	the	beginning.	Quite	often	he'll	read	a	couple	of
segments	then	toss	the	book	aside,	not	because	he	has	lost	interest	in	it,	but
because	something	else	came	to	his	mind.	And	even	if	he	were	to	read	the	whole
—do	you	think	that	he	can	visualize	it	in	its	entirety	and	appreciate	the
relationship	and	harmony	of	its	individual	parts	unless	he	hears	it	from	an
expert?	Is	it	for	this	that	an	author	toils	for	years,	cuts	his	material	and	bends	it
into	shape,	tears	it	apart	and	patches	it	up	again,	sweats	and	agonizes	over	it—so
that	an	expert	may	tell	the	reader	that	its	construction	is	good?	But	let's	go	on,
on,	and	into	the	realm	of	the	reader's	everyday	personal	experience!	Might	not
just	a	phone	call,	or	a	fly,	interrupt	his	reading	precisely	at	the	point	where	all	theindividual	parts	unite	in	a	dramatic	resolution?	Or	what	if,	at	that	very	moment,
his	brother	(for	instance)	comes	into	the	room	and	says	something.	The	author's
noble minded	pains	go	for	naught	
vis	à	vis	
the	brother,	the	fly,	or	the	phone	call
—fie!	nasty	little	flies,	why	do	you	bite	human	beings	who	have	lost	their	tails
long	ago	and	have	nothing	to	swat	with?	What's	more,	let	us	consider	whether
your	work,	this	unique,	outstanding,	and	elaborate	work	is	merely	a	particle	of
some	thirty	thousand	other	works,	equally	unique,	which	make	their	appearance
year	in,	year	out	and	on	the	principle	of	"each	year	be	sure	to	add,	whether	bad
or	good,	a	new	
oeuvre	
to	your	brood"?	Oh,	horrid	parts!	Is	this	why	we	construct
a	whole,	so	that	a	particle	of	a	part	of	the	reader	will	absorb	a	particle	of	a	part	of
the	work,	and	only	partly	af	that?
It's	hard	not	to	play	little	games	and	make	fun	of	the	subject.	Making	fun	is	the
name	of	the	game.	Because	we've	learned	long	ago	to	make	fun	of	that	which	too
scathingly	makes	fun	of	us.	Will	there	ever	be	a	sufficiently	serious minded
genius	who	will	look	life's	trivia	in	the	eye	without	bursting	into	a	dumb	giggle?
Someone	whose	greatness	will	ever	be	a	match	for	triviality?	Hey ho,	I'm	setting
here	a	tone,	a	tone	for	my	carefree	feuilleton!	But	let's	note	further	(to	drain	the
chalice	of	particles	to	the	last	drop)	that	the	cannons	and	principles	of
construction	to	which	we	so	slavishly	adhere	are	also	the	product	of	a	mere	part,
and	a	rather	minuscule	part	at	that.	It's	only	an	insignificant	part	of	the	world,	a
scant	circle	of	experts	and	aesthetes,	a	small	world	no	bigger	than	one's	little
finger,	a	world	that	could	fit	in	its	entirety	into	one	café,	that	constantly	shapes
itself,	squeezing	out	ever	more	refined	postulates.	But	what's	worse,	their	tastes
are	not	actually	tastes—no,	their	fancy	for	the	construction	of	your	work	is	only
a	small	part,	the	larger	part	being	their	fancy	for	their	own	expertise	on	the
subject	of	construction.	Is	this	why	an	author	tries	to	show	his	skill	in	the	way	he
constructs	his	work,	so	that	an	expert	may	show	off	his	expertise	on	the	subject?
Quiet,	shush,	something	mysterious	is	happening,	here	before	us	is	a	fifty year 
old	author,	on	his	knees	at	the	altar	of	art,	creating,	thinking	about	his
masterpiece,	about	its	harmony,	precision,	and	beauty,	about	its	spirit	and	how	to
overcome	its	difficulties,	and	there	is	the	expert	thoroughly	studying	the	author's
material,	whereupon	the	masterpiece	goes	out	into	the	world	and	to	the	reader,
and	what	was	conceived	in	utter	and	absolute	agony	is	now	received	piecemeal,
between	a	telephone	call	and	a	hamburger.	Here	is	the	writer	who	with	all	his
heart	and	soul,	with	his	art,	in	anguish	and	travail	offers	nourishment—there	is
the	reader	who'll	have	none	of	it,	and	if	he	wants	it,	it's	only	in	passing,
offhandedly,	until	the	phone	rings.	Life's	trivia	are	your	undoing.	You	are	like	aman	who	has	challenged	a	dragon	to	a	fight	but	will	be	yapped	into	a	corner	by	a
little	dog.
But	to	go	on,	I	want	to	ask	you	(to	take	one	more	swig	from	the	chalice	of
particles)—in	your	opinion—does	a	work	that	obeys	all	the	cannons	express	a
whole	or	only	a	part?	Indeed!	Doesn't	all	form	rely	on	the	process	of	exclusion,
isn't	all	construction	a	process	of	whittling	down,	can	a	word	express	anything
but	a	part	of	reality?	The	rest	is	silence.	And	finally,	do	we	create	form	or	does
form	create	us?	We	think	we	are	the	ones	who	construct	it,	but	that's	an	illusion,
because	we	are,	in	equal	measure,	constructed	by	the	construction.	Whatever	you
put	down	on	paper	dictates	what	comes	next,	because	the	work	is	not	born	of
you—you	want	to	write	one	thing,	yet	something	entirely	different	comes	out.
Parts	tend	to	wholeness,	every	part	surreptitiously	makes	its	way	toward	the
whole,	strives	for	roundness,	and	seeks	fulfillment,	it	implores	the	rest	to	be
created	in	its	own	image	and	likeness.	Out	of	the	turbulent	sea	of	images	our
mind	catches	a	certain	part,	let's	say	an	ear	or	a	leg;	then,	right	at	the	beginning
of	a	work,	the	ear	or	the	leg	drifts	under	our	pen,	and	henceforward	we	can	no
longer	extricate	ourselves	from	this	part,	so	we	continue	with	it,	it	imposes	on	us
all	the	remaining	body	parts.	We	wrap	ourselves	around	that	part	like	ivy	round
an	oak	tree,	the	beginning	sets	up	the	end,	and	the	end—the	beginning,	while	the
middle	evolves	between	the	beginning	and	the	end.	A	total	inability	to
encompass	wholeness	marks	the	human	soul.	What	are	we	then	to	do	with	a	part
that	has	turned	up	and	is	not	in	our	likeness,	as	if	a	thousand	lustful,	fiery
stallions	had	visited	the	bed	of	our	child's	mother—and	hey!	if	only	to	save	some
semblance	of	paternity	we	must,	with	all	the	moral	power	at	our	disposal,	try	to
resemble	our	work,	but	it	doesn't	want	to	resemble	us.	Indeed,	I	remember	a
writer	I	knew	years	ago	who,	at	the	outset	of	his	career,	happened	to	write	a
heroic	book.	With	his	first	words,	and	quite	accidentally,	he	struck	a	heroic	chord
—he	could	equally	well	have	struck	a	skeptical	or	lyrical	note—but	the	first	few
sentences	happened	to	sound	heroic,	therefore,	out	of	consideration	for	the
harmony	of	construction,	he	couldn't	help	but	to	go	on	enhancing	the	heroism,
step	by	step,	to	the	very	end.	And	he	continued	roundingoff	the	edges	of	his
material,	polishing	and	perfecting	it,	revising	it,	matching	the	beginning	with	the
end,	and	the	end	with	the	beginning,	until	the	work	emerged	like	a	living	thing,
full	of	deep	convictions.	But	what	could	he	do	with	those	deep	convictions?
Could	he	then	turn	around	and	deny	them?	Can	an	author	who	is	responsible	for
his	every	word	admit	that	he	just	stumbled	upon	a	heroic	theme,	that	those	deep
convictions	are	not	his	deep	convictions	at	all,	that	they	had	somehow	crept	infrom	outside	and	had	crawled	over,	ambled,	and	clambered	into	his	text?
Absolutely	not!	Because	such	trite	methods	as	stumbling	upon,	crawling	over,	or
creeping	in	have	no	place	in	a	sophisticated	piece	of	work,	they	are	a	makeshift
approach	suitable	only	for	a	frothy	and	playfully	unimportant	magazine	article.
In	vain	did	our	hapless	heroic	writer	hide	in	embarrassment	and	try	to	weasel	out
of	the	part	that	caught	hold	of	him,	while	the	part,	once	having	grabbed	him,
would	not	let	go,	and	he	had	to	adapt	to	it.	And	he	continued	to	become	more
and	more	like	the	part	until,	at	the	end	of	his	writing	career,	he	became	just	like
it,	and	just	as	heroic—	though	a	rather	weakly	victim	of	his	heroism.	And	he
avoided	his	colleagues	and	companions	from	the	time	of	immaturity	like	the
plague,	because	they	marveled	at	the	whole	that	had	so	closely	been	matched
with	the	part.	And	they	called	to	him:	"Hey,	Bolek!	Do	you	remember	that
fingernail	...	the	fingernail	.	.	.	Bolek,	Bolek,	little	Bolek,	do	you	remember	the
fingernail	on	the	green	meadow?	The	fingernail?	That	fingernail,	Bolek boy,
where	is	it	now?"
These	are	then	the	basic	fundamental	and	philosophical	reasons	that	have
induced	me	to	build	a	work	on	a	foundation	of	individual	parts—treating	the
work	itself	as	a	particle	of	the	work,	man	as	a	union	of	parts,	and	mankind	as	a
composite	of	parts	and	pieces.	But	if	anyone	were	to	complain:	this	part concept
is	not—if	truth	be	known—a	concept	at	all	but	sheer	nonsense,	a	mockery	and
leg pulling,	and	that	I'm	trying,	instead	of	complying	with	strict	rules	and
cannons	of	art,	to	evade	them	by	mocking	them—I	would	reply:	yes,	yes	indeed,
these	and	none	other	are	my	intentions.	And—so	help	me	God—I	don't	hesitate
to	admit	it—I	don't	want	to	have	anything	to	do	with	your	Art,	gentlemen,	which
I	can't	stand,	just	as	much	as	I	don't	want	to	have	anything	to	do	with	you	..	.
because	I	can't	stand	you,	with	your	ideas,	your	artistic	posturing,	and	all	that
artistic	little	world	of	yours.
Gentlemen,	there	are	on	this	earth	societies	that	are	more	or	less	ridiculous,	more
or	less	degrading,	shameful	and	humiliating—and	the	amount	of	stupidity	is	also
variable.	So,	for	example,	a	guild	of	hairdressers	may	seem,	at	first	sight,	more
prone	to	stupidity	than	a	guild	of	cobblers.	But	what	goes	on	in	the	world	of	art
beats	all	for	stupidity	and	degradation—and	to	such	a	degree	that	someone	who
has	some	sense	of	decency	and	balance	can't	help	but	lower	his	brow	in	burning
shame	when	confronted	with	this	childish	and	pretentious	orgy.	Oh,	those
inspired	songs	to	which	no	one	listens!	Oh,	the	connoisseurs'	clever	talk	and
their	enthusiasm	at	concerts	and	poetry	readings,	oh,	the	initiations,
valorizations,	discussions,	and	oh,	the	faces	of	those	who	recite	or	listen	topoetry	and	collectively	celebrate	the	mystery	of	beauty!	By	what	painful	paradox
does	everything	you	say	or	do	transform	itself,	under	these	circumstances,	into
the	ridiculous?	When,	over	time,	a	society	lapses	into	fits	of	stupidity,	one	can
definitely	say	that	its	ideas	are	not	in	keeping	with	reality,	that	it	simply	stuffs
itself	with	bogus	ideas.	And,	without	a	doubt,	your	artistic	concepts	have	also
reached	the	peak	of	conceptual	naivete;	but	if	you	want	to	know	how	and	in
what	sense	they	should	be	revised,	I'll	tell	you	soon	enough—but	you	have	to
lend	me	your	ear.
What	is	it	that	someone	really	desires	these	days	when	he	feels	a	calling	to	take
up	the	pen,	the	brush?	He	yearns,	first	and	foremost,	to	be	an	artist.	He	yearns	to
create	Art.	He	dreams	of	satiating	himself	and	his	fellow	men	with	Beauty,
Goodness,	Truth,	he	wants	to	be	their	high	priest	of	art	and	their	bard	by	offering
up	all	the	riches	of	his	talent	to	thirsting	mankind.	And	perhaps	he	also	wants	to
offer	his	talent	in	the	service	of	some	great	idea	as	well	as	of	his	Nation.	What
lofty	goals!	What	magnanimous	undertakings!	Wasn't	this	the	role	of	all	the
Shakespeares	and	the	Chopins?	But,	mark	you,	here	is	the	catch:	you	are	not,	as
yet,	Chopins	nor	Shakespeares,	you	are	not,	as	yet,	fully	fledged	artists	nor	high
priests	of	art;	you	are	at	most,	in	the	present	phase	of	your	development,	merely
half Shakespeares	and	quarter Chopins	(oh,	those	accursed	parts	again!)—and
therefore	your	posturing	does	nothing	but	expose	your	miserable	deficiencies—
it's	as	if	you	wanted,	at	any	cost,	to	jump	onto	a	pedestal,	thereby	endangering
your	precious	and	sensitive	body	parts.
Believe	me:	there	is	a	great	difference	between	an	artist	who	has	realized	his
potential	and	a	horde	of	half artists	and	quarter bards	who	merely	dream	of
doing	so.	And	that	which	befits	a	fully	fledged	artist	has,	when	it	comes	from
you,	an	entirely	different	ring.	Yet	you,	instead	of	conceiving	ideas	to	your	own
measure,	ideas	that	fit	your	own	reality,	you	adorn	yourselves	with	someone
else's	feathers—and	this	is	why	you	become	mere	hopefuls,	forever	inept,	whose
grades	will	never	be'	more	than	a	puny	C,	you	servants	and	imitators,	vassals	and
admirers	of	Art,	which	keeps	you	in	its	antechambers.	Truly,	it's	a	terrible	thing
to	watch	you	try	and	not	succeed,	to	watch	you	push	on	with	new	works	and	try
to	foist	them	on	others	even	as	you're	being	told	"that's	not	quite	it,"	to	watch
you	boost	yourselves	with	awful,	second rate	little	successes,	pay	each	other
compliments,	arrange	artistic	soirées,	and	persuade	yourselves	and	others	to
create	ever	new	disguises	for	your	own	ineptness.	And	you	don't	have	the
consolation	that	what	you	write	and	concoct	is	of	any	value	whatsoever,	even	to
yourselves.	Because	all	of	it,	I	repeat,	all	of	it,	is	mere	imitation,	it's	been	pickedup	from	the	masters—it's	nothing	but	a	premature	illusion	that	your	quality	is
being	recognized,	that	you	have	attained	a	measure	of	worth.	Your	situation	is
false	and,	being	false,	must	bear	bitter	fruit,	therefore	animosity,	disdain,
maliciousness	grow	ripe	among	you,	and	everyone	looks	down	on	everyone	else
and	on	himself	in	particular,	you	are	a	brotherhood	of	disdain—	until	you'll
finally	scorn	each	other	to	death.	What	is	the	situation,	actually,	of	a	second rate
writer	if	not	one	of	major	rebuff?	The	first	and	merciless	rebuff	is	inflicted	upon
him	by	the	ordinary	reader	who	simply	refuses	to	relish	the	writer's	works.	The
second	shameful	rebuff	is	meted	out	to	him	by	his	own	reality,	which	he	has
been	unable	to	express.	And	the	third	rebuff,	the	most	shameful	of	all	and	a	real
kick	in	the	pants,	is	dealt	him	by	art	itself,	the	art	to	which	he	has	turned	for
shelter	but	which	regards	him	with	utter	disdain,	as	inept	and	inadequate.	And
this	fills	the	cup	of	disgrace.	This	is	where	true	homelessness	begins.	This	is	how
the	second rate	writer	becomes	the	butt	of	ridicule	from	all	sides,	caught	as	he	is
in	the	crossfire	of	rebuff.	Truly,	what	can	be	expected	of	a	man	rebuffed	three
times,	each	time	more	shamefully	than	the	time	before?	And	when	he's	dressed
down	like	this,	shouldn't	a	man	pack	his	bags	and	leave,	shouldn't	he	hide
somewhere	so	he	can't	be	seen?	Can	inadequacy	which	parades	in	the	light	of
day	and	which	craves	honors	be	wholesome,	won't	it	provoke	one's	nature	to
hiccup?
But	first	tell	me	this—in	your	opinion,	are	Anjou	pears	better	and	juicier	than
Bosc	pears,	aren't	you	more	partial	to	the	former	than	to	the	latter?	And	do	you
like	to	eat	them	while	sitting	comfortably	in	wicker	chairs	on	the	porch?	For
shame,	gentlemen,	for	shame,	shame,	and	shame	again!	I'm	not	a	philosopher
and	theoretician,	no—but	I'm	talking	about	you,	I'm	thinking	about	your	life,	do
understand	me,	I'm	purely	and	simply	troubled	by	your	personal	situation.	You
just	can't	break	free.	Oh,	this	inability	of	yours	to	cut	the	umbilical	cord	that	ties
you	to	mankind's	rebuff!	A	soul	rebuffed—a	flower	unsniffed—a	candy	that
wants	so	much	to	be	tasty	but	pleases	no	one—a	woman	spurned—all	these	have
always	caused	me	sheer	physical	pain,	I	just	can't	bear	this	lack	of	fulfillment,
and	when	I	meet	one	of	those	artists	downtown	and	realize	to	what	extent	an
ordinary	rebuff	lies	at	the	basis	of	his	existence,	how	his	every	move,	every
word,	how	his	beliefs,	his	enthusiasms,	his	every	comma,	his	hurt	ego,	his	pride,
his	crying	shame	and	suffering,	how	they	all	give	off	the	smell	of	an	ordinary
and	unpleasant	rebuff,	I	too	feel	shame.	And	I	feel	shame	not	because	I
commiserate	with	him	but	because	I	live	side	by	side	with	him,	because	his
grotesque	nature	touches	me	and	everyone	else	whose	consciousness	it	haspenetrated.	Believe	me,	it's	about	time	to	decide	and	settle	the	status	of	the
second rate	writer,	otherwise	everyone	will	be	left	nauseated.	Isn't	it	strange	that
people	who	dedicate	themselves	
ex	professo	
to	form	and	therefore,	one	would
think,	are	sensitive	to	style,	give	in	without	a	protest	to	such	a	false	and
pretentious	state	of	affairs?	Can't	you	understand	that	from	the	point	of	view	of
form	and	style	nothing	can	be	more	disastrous	in	its	consequences—because
whoever	finds	himself	in	such	a	false	situation,	in	such	entirely	shoddy
circumstances,	cannot	utter	a	single	word	that	won't	be	shoddy.
How	should	we	then—you'll	ask—express	ourselves	in	a	way	that	would	be
congruent	with	our	reality,	yet	at	the	same	time	be	autonomous?	Gentlemen,	it's
not	within	your	power	to	transform	yourselves,	well,	let's	say	from	Tuesday	to
Wednesday,	into	mature	masters,	but	you	could	save	your	dignity	to	some	degree
by	distancing	yourselves	from	Art,	which	sticks	it	to	you	with	that	disconcerting
pupa.	To	begin	with,	part	company	forever	with	the	word:	art,	and	that	other
word:	artist.	Stop	wallowing	in	these	words	and	repeating	them	with	such
endless	monotony.	Isn't	everyone	a	bit	of	an	artist?	Isn't	it	true	that	mankind
creates	art	not	only	on	paper	or	on	canvas,	but	also	in	every	moment	of	everyday
life—when	a	young	girl	pins	a	flower	in	her	hair,	when	in	the	course	of
conversation	a	little	joke	escapes	your	lips,	when	we	melt	with	emotion	at	the
beauty	of	twilight's	light	and	shadow,	what	is	all	this	if	not	the	practicing	of	art?
Why	then	this	odd	and	idiotic	division	into	"artists"	and	the	rest	of	mankind?
Wouldn't	it	be	more	wholesome	if	you	simply	said:	"perhaps	I	busy	myself	with
art	a	little	more	than	others	do,"	rather	than	to	proudly	declare	yourselves	artists?
Further,	what	use	is	it	to	you,	this	worship	of	the	art	contained	within	the	so 
called	"works	of	art"—how	did	you	dream	it	up,	what's	given	you	the	daft	idea
that	man	has	such	a	great	admiration	for	works	of	art,	that	we	swoon	in	heavenly
bliss	when	we	listen	to	a	Bach	fugue?	Have	you	ever	thought	how	impure,
murky,	and	immature	is	the	artistic	aspect	of	culture—	the	aspect	that	you	want
to	lock	up	within	your	simplistic	phraseology?	The	mistake	that	you	so
commonly	and	flagrantly	make	is	primarily	this:	you	reduce	man's	communion
with	art	to	artistic	emotion	alone,	and,	at	the	same	time,	you	define	this
communion	in	utterly	egocentric	terms,	as	if	each	one	of	us	were	experiencing
art	totally	on	our	own—a	single handed,	single legged	experience—and	in
hermetic	isolation	from	your	fellow	men.	Yet	in	real	life	we're	dealing	with	a
blend	of	many	emotions,	of	many	individuals	who,	acting	on	each	other,	create	a
collective	experience.
And	so,	when	a	pianist	bangs	out	Chopin	in	a	concert	hall,	you	say	that	themagic	of	Chopin's	music,	masterfully	rendered	by	this	master	pianist,	has	thrilled
the	audience.	Yet	it's	possible	that	actually	no	one	in	the	audience	has	been
thrilled.	Let's	not	exclude	the	possibility	that,	had	they	not	known	Chopin	to	be	a
great	genius,	and	the	pianist	likewise,	they	would	have	listened	to	the	music	with
less	ardor.	It's	also	possible	that	when	some	listeners,	pale	with	emotion,
applaud,	scream,	carry	on,	writhe	in	enthusiasm	one	should	attribute	this	to	the
fact	that	others	in	the	audience	are	also	writhing,	carrying	on,	shouting;	because
every	one	of	them	thinks	that	the	others	are	experiencing	an	incredible	ecstasy,	a
transcendent	emotion,	and	therefore	his	emotions	as	well	begin	to	rise	on
someone	else's	yeast;	and	thus	it	can	easily	happen	that	while	no	one	in	the
concert	hall	has	been	directly	enraptured,	everyone	expresses	rapture—because
everyone	wants	to	conform	to	his	neighbor.	And	it's	not	until	all	of	them	in	a
bunch	have	sufficiently	excited	each	other,	it	is	only	then,	I	tell	you,	that	these
expressions	of	emotion	arouse	their	emotion—because	we	must	comply	with
what	we	express.	It's	also	true	that	by	participating	in	the	concert	we	fulfill
something	of	a	religious	act	(just	as	if	we	were	assisting	at	the	Holy	Mass),
kneeling	devoutly	before	the	Godhead	of	artistry;	in	this	case	our	admiration	is
merely	an	act	of	homage	and	the	fulfilling	of	a	rite.	Who	can	tell,	however,	how
much	real	beauty	there	is	in	this	Beauty,	and	how	much	of	it	is	a	sociohistorical
process?	Tut,	tut,	as	everyone	knows,	mankind	needs	myths—it	chooses	this	one
or	that	one	from	among	its	numerous	authors	(but	who	can	ever	explore	or	shed
light	on	the	course	that	such	a	choice	has	taken?),	whereupon	it	proceeds	to
elevate	him	above	all	others,	to	memorize	his	works,	to	discover	in	him	its	own
mysteries,	to	subordinate	its	emotions	to	him—but	if	we	were	to	elevate,	with
the	same	doggedness,	some	other	artist,	then	he	would	become	our	Homer.	Can't
you	see	then,	how	many	varied	and	often	other	than	aesthetic	elements	(a	list	of
which	I	could	tediously	extend	
ad	infinitum)	
make	up	the	greatness	of	the	artist
and	his	work?	And	you	want	to	enclose	this	muddled,	complicated,	and	difficult
communion	with	art	in	the	naive	phrase:	"the	poet	sings	with	inspiration,	the
listener	lends	his	ear	in	admiration"?
Stop	then	pampering	art,	stop—for	God's	sake!—this	whole	system	of	puffing	it
up	and	magnifying	it;	and,	instead	of	intoxicating	yourselves	with	legends,	let
facts	create	you.	And	once	you	open	your	minds	to	Reality	this	alone	may	bring
you	great	relief—at	the	same	time	stop	worrying	that	it	will	impoverish	and
shrivel	your	spirit—	because	Reality	is	always	richer	than	naive	illusions	and
idle	notions.	And	I	will	soon	show	you	what	riches	await	you	on	this	new	path.
Certainly	art	is	the	perfecting	of	form.	But	you	seem	to	think—and	here	isanother	of	your	cardinal	mistakes—that	art	consists	of	creating	works	perfect	in
their	form;	you	reduce	this	all encompassing,	omni human	process	of	creating
form	to	the	turning	out	of	poems	and	symphonies;	and	you've	never	been	able	to
truly	experience	nor	explain	to	others	what	an	enormous	role	form	plays	in	our
lives.	Even	in	the	field	of	psychology	you	haven't	been	able	to	secure	form	its
proper	place.	You	still	seem	to	think	that	emotions,	instincts,	ideas	govern	our
behavior,	while	you're	inclined	to	consider	form	to	be	a	superficial	appendage
and	a	simple	gewgaw.	When	a	widow	who	walks	behind	her	husband's	casket
cries	and	wails	to	the	point	of	splitting	her	sides,	you	surmise	she's	wailing
because	she's	overcome	by	her	loss.	Or	when	some	engineer,	doctor,	or	lawyer
murders	his	wife,	children,	or	friend,	you	think	that	he	let	himself	be	seized	by
bloodthirsty	instincts.	Or	when	a	politician	says	something	stupid,	you	think	that
he's	stupid	because	he's	talking	nothing	but	nonsense.	But	in	Reality	matters
stand	as	follows:	a	human	being	does	not	express	himself	forthrightly	and	in
keeping	with	his	nature	but	always	in	some	well defined	form,	and	this	form,
this	style,	this	manner	of	being	is	not	of	our	making	but	is	thrust	upon	us	from
outside—and	this	is	why	one	and	the	same	individual	can	present	himself	on	the
outside	as	wise	or	stupid,	as	bloodthirsty	or	angelic,	as	mature	or	immature—
depending	upon	the	style	he	happens	to	come	up	with,	and	in	what	way	he	is
dependent	on	others.	And	just	as	beetles,	insects	chase	after	food	all	day,	so	do
we	tirelessly	pursue	form,	we	hassle	other	people	with	our	style,	our	manners
while	riding	in	a	streetcar,	while	eating	or	enjoying	ourselves,	while	resting	or
attending	to	our	business—we	always,	unceasingly,	seek	form,	and	we	delight	in
it	or	suffer	by	it,	and	we	conform	to	it	or	we	violate	and	demolish	it,	or	we	let	it
create	us,	amen.
Oh,	the	power	of	Form!	Nations	die	because	of	it.	It	is	the	cause	of	wars.	It
creates	something	in	us	that	is	not	of	us.	If	you	make	light	of	it	you'll	never
understand	stupidity	nor	evil	nor	crime.	It	governs	our	slightest	impulses.	It	is	at
the	base	of	our	collective	life.	For	you,	however,	Form	and	Style	still	belong
strictly	to	the	realm	of	the	aesthetic—for	you	style	is	on	paper	only,	in	the	style
of	your	stories.	Gentlemen,	who	will	slap	your	pupa	which	you	dare	turn	toward
others	as	you	kneel	at	the	altar	of	art?	For	you	form	is	not	something	that	is
human	and	alive,	something—I'd	say—practical	and	everyday,	but	just	a	feature
for	the	holidays.	And	while	you're	leaning	over	a	piece	of	paper	you	forget	your
own	self—you	don't	care	about	perfecting	your	own	individual	and	concrete
style,	you	merely	practice	an	abstract	stylization	in	a	vacuum.	Instead	of	art
serving	you,	you	serve	art—and	with	a	sheeplike	docility	you	let	it	impede	yourdevelopment,	and	you	let	it	push	you	into	the	hell	of	indolence.
Now	consider	how	different	the	stance	would	be	of	someone	who,	instead	of
feeding	on	the	words	of	the	concept	makers,	would	sweep	the	world	with	a	fresh
look	and	with	an	understanding	of	the	boundless	importance	of	form	in	our	lives.
If	he	were	to	take	up	the	pen	it	would	not	be	for	the	sake	of	becoming	an	Artist
but—let's	say—to	better	express	his	individuality	and	explain	it	to	others;	or	else
to	put	his	internal	affairs	in	order,	and	also,	perhaps,	to	deepen	and	sharpen	his
relationship	with	his	fellow	men	because	other	souls	exert	an	immense	and
creative	influence	on	our	soul;	or,	for	example,	to	try	to	fight	for	a	world	as	he
would	like	it	to	be,	for	a	world	that	is	indispensable	to	his	life.	He	would,	of
course,	spare	no	effort	to	have	his	work	attract	people	and	win	their	hearts	with
its	artistic	charm but	in	this	case	his	chief	goal	would	not	be	art	but	the
expression	of	his	own	person.	And	I	say	"his	own,"	not	"someone	else's,"
because	it's	high	time	you	stopped	thinking	of	yourselves	as	creatures	of	a	higher
order	who	are	here	to	edify	and	enlighten	someone	else,	to	lead	and	raise
someone	else	into	the	sublime,	or	to	improve	someone	else's	morals.	Who	has
granted	you	this	superiority?	Where	does	it	say	that	you	now	belong	to	a	higher
class?	Who	has	promoted	you	to	aristocracy?	Who	gave	you	a	patent	on
Maturity?	Oh	no,	this	writer,	the	one	I'm	talking	about,	will	not	write	because	he
considers	himself	mature	but	because	he	is	aware	of	his	immaturity,	because	he
knows	that	he	doesn't	know	everything	about	form,	he	knows	he	is	still	climbing
and	has	not	quite	yet	crawled	to	the	top,	that	he	is	in	the	process	of	becoming	but
has	not	yet	become.	And	if	he	happens	to	write	something	inept	and	silly	he'll
say:	"Great!	I've	written	something	stupid,	but	I	haven't	signed	a	contract	with
anyone	to	produce	solely	wise	and	perfect	works.	I	gave	vent	to	my	stupidity	and
I'm	glad	of	it,	because	the	animosity	and	harshness	of	others	that	I've	aroused
against	me	will	now	form	and	shape	me,	it	will	create	me	as	if	anew,	and	here	I
am—reborn."	Which	shows	that	the	bard	who	has	such	a	sound	philosophy,	one
who	is	so	well grounded	within	himself	that	neither	stupidity	nor	immaturity	can
threaten	nor	harm	him,	this	bard	can,	his	head	raised	high,	express	himself	even
as	he	is	being	indolent,	while	you,	you	can	no	longer	express	much	of	anything
because	fear	deprives	you	of	speech.
With	all	this	in	mind,	the	reform	I	recommend	should	bring	you	considerable
relief.	One	must	add,	however,	that	only	a	masterly	writer	cognizant	of	these
matters	would	be	equal	to	grappling	with	this	problem,	which,	thus	far,	has	dealt
you	the	worst	possible	pupa—	and	the	problem	which	I	raise	here	is,	very	likely,
the	most	fundamental,	the	most	awesome,	and	the	most	brilliant	(I	have	nohesitation	in	using	this	word)	of	all	the	problems	of	style	and	culture.	Here	is	a
graphic	way	of	formulating	the	problem:	imagine	that	the	adult	and	mature	bard,
leaning	over	a	piece	of	paper,	is	in	the	process	of	creating	.	..	but	on	his	back	a
youth	has	squarely	settled	himself,	or	some	semi enlightened	fellow	from	the
semi intelligentsia,	or	a	young	maiden,	or	some	nondescript	slouch	of	a	soul,	or
some	kind	of	juvenile,	lowbrow,	ignorant	creature,	and	then—this	creature,	this
youth,	this	maiden,	or	lowbrow	fellow,	or	for	that	matter	any	muddle headed	son
of	the	unenlightened	quarter culture—suddenly	pounces	on	his	soul	and	drags	it
down,	constricts	it,	kneads	it	with	his	paws,	yet	at	the	same	time,	by	embracing
this	soul,	by	soaking	it	up,	sucking	it	in,	he	rejuvenates	it	with	his	youth,	seasons
it	with	his	immaturity,	and	prepares	it	to	his	own	liking,	then	he	brings	it	down	to
his	own	level—and	oh,	into	his	arms!	But	this	author,	instead	of	pitting	himself
against	his	assailant,	pretends	that	he	does	not	see	him	and—what	idiocy!—he
thinks	he'll	avoid	being	violated	by	putting	on	a	face	as	if	he	were	not	being
violated.	Isn't	this	exactly	what	happens	to	you,	beginning	with	great	geniuses	all
the	way	to	mediocre	bards	in	the	gallery?	Isn't	it	true	that	every	being	who	is	at	a
higher	level	of	development,	who	is	older	and	more	mature,	is	dependent	in	a
thousand	different	ways	on	beings	who	are	less	well	developed,	and	doesn't	this
dependence	permeate	us	through	and	through,	to	our	very	core	and	to	the	extent
that	we	can	say:	the	elder	is	created	by	the	younger?	When	we	write,	don't	we
have	to	accommodate	the	reader?	Just	as	when	we	speak—don't	we	depend	on
the	person	we're	addressing?	Are	we	not	mortally	in	love	with	youth?	Are	we	not
obliged	then,	at	every	moment,	to	ingratiate	ourselves	with	beings	who	are
below	us,	to	tune	in	with	them,	to	surrender,	be	it	to	their	power	or	to	their
charms—and	isn't	this	painful	violence	that's	being	committed	on	our	person	by
some	half enlightened,	inferior	being	the	most	seminal	of	all	violence?	Thus	far,
however,	and	contrary	to	all	your	rhetoric,	you	have	only	been	able	to	hide	your
head	in	the	sand,	and	your	scholarly	and	didactic	mentality,	suffused	with
conceit,	has	made	you	unaware	of	this	matter.	In	reality	you're	constantly	being
violated,	yet	you	pretend	that	nothing	is	happening—	because	you,	oh	mature
ones,	keep	company	solely	with	other	mature	ones,	and	your	maturity	is	so
mature	that	it	can	only	chum	up	with	maturity!
If	you	were,	however,	less	concerned	with	Art	or	the	edifying	and	perfecting	of
others	and	more	with	your	own	pitiful	selves,	you	would	never	acquiesce	to	such
a	terrible	violation	of	the	self;	a	poet,	instead	of	creating	poems	for	another	poet,
would	feel	that	he's	being	suffused	and	created	by	forces	from	below,	forces	of
which,	thus	far,	he	had	not	even	been	aware.	He	would	realize	that	only	byaccepting	them	would	he	be	able	to	free	himself	of	them;	and	he	would	do	his
best	to	show,	in	his	style,	in	his	artistic	as	well	as	everyday	attitude	and	form,	a
clear	link	with	all	that's	inferior	to	him.	He	would	then	feel	not	only	like	a
Father,	but	like	a	Father	and	a	Son:	he	would	write	not	solely	like	a	wise,	refined
and	mature	one,	but	rather	like	a	Wise	One	who	benefits	from	stupidity,	like	a
Refined	One	who	profits	from	being	tirelessly	brutalized,	and	like	a	Mature	One
who	is	being	ceaselessly	rejuvenated.	And	if,	upon	leaving	his	writing	desk,	he
were	to	run	into	that	youth	or	that	lowbrow	he	would	no	longer	pat	him
condescendingly	on	the	back	like	a	preacher	or	a	pedagogue,	but	instead	he
would	wail	and	roar	in	holy	trembling,	and	perhaps	even	fall	to	his	knees!
Instead	of	fleeing	from	immaturity	and	shutting	himself	within	the	ambit	of	the
sublime,	he	would	realize	that	a	universal	style	is	one	that	knows	how	to
embrace	lovingly	those	not	quite	developed.	And	this	would	finally	lead	all	of
you	to	a	form	that	would	pant	with	creativity	and	be	filled	with	poetry,	so	much
so	that	the	whole	bunch	of	you	would	transform	yourselves	into	powerful
geniuses.
Take	note	then,	what	hope	I	send	your	way	with	such	an	individually	personal
concept—and	what	perspectives!	But,	for	this	idea	to	be	a	hundred	percent
creative	and	definitive,	you	must	take	yet	another	step	forward—but	this	step
must	be	so	bold	and	resolute,	so	limitless	in	its	possibilities	and	destructive	in	its
consequences,	that	my	lips	will	mention	it	only	softly	and	from	a	distance.	Here
it	is:	the	time	has	come,	the	hour	has	struck	on	the	clock	of	history—make	an
effort	to	overcome	form,	to	liberate	yourselves	from	it.	Stop	identifying
yourselves	with	that	which	delimits	you.	You,	artists,	try	to	avoid	all	expression
of	yourselves.	Don't	trust	your	own	words.	Be	on	guard	against	all	your	beliefs
and	do	not	trust	your	feelings.	Back	away	from	what	you	are	on	the	outside	and
tremble	with	fear	at	any	self manifestation,	just	as	a	little	bird	trembles	at	the
sight	of	a	snake.
I	don't	know,	truly,	whether	such	things	should	pass	my	lips	this	day,	but	the
stipulation—that	an	individual	be	well	defined,	immutable	in	his	ideas,	absolute
in	his	pronouncements,	unwavering	in	his	ideology,	firm	in	his	tastes,
responsible	for	his	words	and	deeds,	fixed	once	and	for	all	in	his	ways—is
flawed.	Consider	more	closely	the	chimerical	nature	of	such	a	stipulation.	Our
element	is	unending	immaturity.	What	we	think,	feel	today	will	unavoidably	be
silliness	to	our	great	grandchildren.	It	is	better	then	that	we	should	acknowledge
today	that	portion	of	silliness	which	time	will	reveal...	and	the	force	that	impels
you	to	a	premature	definition	is	not,	as	you	think,	a	totally	human	force.	We	shallsoon	realize	that	the	most	important	is	not:	to	die	for	ideas,	styles,	theses,
slogans,	beliefs;	and	also	not:	to	solidify	and	enclose	ourselves	in	them;	but
something	different,	it	is	this:	to	step	back	a	pace	and	secure	a	distance	from
everything	that	unendingly	happens	to	us.
A	Retreat.	I	have	a	hunch	(but	I	don't	know	whether	my	lips	should	confess	it
now)	that	the	time	for	a	Universal	Retreat	is	at	hand.	The	son	of	earth	will
henceforth	understand	that	he	is	not	expressing	himself	in	harmony	with	his
deepest	being	but	always	in	accordance	with	some	artificial	form	painfully	thrust
upon	him	from	without,	either	by	people	or	by	circumstances.	He	will	then	dread
that	form	of	his	and	feel	ashamed	of	it,	much	as	he	had	thus	far	idolized	and
flaunted	it.	We	will	soon	fear	our	persons	and	our	personalities,	because	it	will
become	apparent	that	they	are	by	no	means	truly	our	own.	And	instead	of
roaring:	"I	believe	in	this—I	feel	it—that's	how	I	am—I'm	ready	to	defend	it,"
we	will	say	in	all	humility:	"Maybe	I	believe	in	it—maybe	I	feel	it—I	happened
to	say	it,	to	do	it,	or	to	think	it."	The	bard	will	scorn	his	own	song.	The	leader
will	shudder	at	his	own	command.	The	high	priest	will	stand	in	terror	of	the
altar,	and	the	mother	will	instill	in	her	son	not	only	principles	but	also	ways	of
escaping	them	so	that	they	do	not	smother	him.
It	will	be	a	long	and	arduous	road.	For	nowadays	individuals	as	well	as	whole
nations	are	quite	good	at	managing	their	psychological	life,	and	they	are	not
strangers	to	creating	styles,	beliefs,	principles,	ideals,	and	feelings	at	will	and
with	their	immediate	interests	in	mind;	yet	they	do	not	know	how	to	live	without
adhering	to	a	style;	and	we	still	don't	know	how	to	defend	the	depths	of	our
freshness	against	the	demon	of	order.	Great	discoveries	are	indispensable 
powerful	blows	struck	by	the	soft	human	hand	at	the	steel	armor	of	Form,	as
well	as	unparalleled	cunning	and	great	integrity	of	thought	and	an	extreme
sharpening	of	intelligence—so	that	man	may	break	loose	from	his	rigidity	and
reconcile	within	himself	form	with	the	formless,	law	with	anarchy,	maturity	with
sacred	and	eternal	immaturity.	But	before	this	happens,	tell	me:	in	your	opinion,
are	Anjou	pears	better	than	Bosc	pears?	Do	you	like	to	snack	on	them	while
comfortably	sitting	in	wicker	chairs	on	the	porch,	or	do	you	prefer	to	abandon
yourselves	to	this	activity	in	the	shade	of	a	tree	while	a	fresh	and	gentle	breeze	is
cooling	your	body	parts?	And	I	ask	you	this	in	all	seriousness	and	with	total
responsibility	for	my	words,	and	likewise	with	the	greatest	respect	for	all	your
parts	without	exception,	because	I	know	that	you	are	a	part	of	Humanity,	of
which	I	am	also	a	part,	and	that	you	partly	take	part	in	the	part	of	something
which	is	also	a	part	and	of	which	I	am	also	in	part	a	part,	together	with	all	theparticles	and	parts	of	parts,	of	parts,	of	parts,	of	parts,	of	parts,	of	parts,	of	parts,
of	parts,	of	parts,	of	parts,	of	parts	...	Help!	Oh,	confounded	parts!	Oh,
bloodthirsty,	nightmarish	parts,	you've	grabbed	me	once	again,	is	there	no
escaping	you,	hah,	where	can	I	find	shelter,	what	am	I	to	do?	oh,	that's	enough;
enough,	enough,	let's	finish	this	part	of	the	book,	let's	swiftly	move	on	to	another
part,	and	I	swear	that	in	the	next	chapter	there	will	be	no	more	particles,	because
I'll	shake	myself	free	of	them	and	cast	them	off,	and	I'll	dump	them	outside	while
inside	I	remain	(in	part	at	least)	without	parts.5	The	Child	Runs	Deep	in	Filidor
The	Prince	of	all	the	most	gloriously	renowned	synthesists	of	all	time	was
without	a	doubt	Dr.	Professor	of	Syn thetology	at	the	University	of	Leyden,	the
High	Filidor,	born	in	the	southern	environs	of	Annam.	He	acted	in	the	pompous
spirit	of	High	Synthesis	mainly	by	addition	+	infinity,	and,	in	emergencies,	also
with	the	aid	of	multiplication	+	infinity.	He	was	a	man	of	goodly	size,	quite
obese,	with	a	windblown	beard	and	the	face	of	a	prophet	in	spectacles.	But,	in
the	natural	order	of	things	and	in	keeping	with	the	Newtonian	principle	of	action
and	reaction,	a	spiritual	phenomenon	of	such	magnitude	could	not	remain
unchallenged	and	therefore,	as	a	counter phenomenon,	an	equally	illustrious
Analyst	was	born	in	Colombo,	and,	having	obtained	a	doctorate	and	a	Professor's
chair	in	the	department	of	High	Analysis	at	Columbia	University,	he	soon
climbed	to	the	highest	echelons	of	a	scientific	career.	He	was	a	lean,	small 
boned,	smoothly	shaven	man	with	the	face	of	a	skeptic	in	spectacles,	and	his
only	inner	mission	was	the	pursuit	and	ruination	of	the	illustrious	Filidor.
The	Analyst's	method	was	decomposition,	and	his	specialty	was	to	decompose	a
person	into	parts	by	means	of	calculation	in	general,	and	by	filliping	noses	in
particular.	He	would	fillip	a	nose	and	thus	activate	it	to	a	life	of	its	own,
whereupon,	to	the	horror	of	its	owner,	the	nose	would	move	spontaneously	in
every	direction.	The	Analyst	often	practiced	his	art	while	riding	a	streetcar,
especially	if	he	was	bored.	And	so,	following	the	voice	of	his	innermost	calling,
he	set	out	in	pursuit	of	Filidor	and,	in	a	small	town	in	Spain,	he	even	managed	to
secure	for	himself	the	genteel	title	of	anti Filidor,	which	made	him	very	proud
indeed.	When	Filidor	found	out	that	he	was	being	pursued	he	set	out,	needless	to
say,	in	pursuit	of	anti Filidor,	and,	since	pride	wouldn't	let	either	of	them	admit
that	he	was	not	only	the	pursuer	but	also	the	pursued,	the	two	scientists	chased
each	other	for	a	long	time	to	no	avail.	And	therefore,	when	Filidor	was	in
Bremen,	for	example,	anti Filidor	sped	from	The	Hague	to	Bremen,	unwilling	or
unable	to	accept	the	fact	that	Filidor,	at	the	same	time	and	with	the	same	goal	in
mind,	was	boarding	the	express	from	Bremen	to	The	Hague.	The	collision,	at
breakneck	speed,	of	the	two	scientists—a	catastrophe	ranking	in	magnitude
among	the	greatest	railroad	catastrophes—took	place	quite	accidentally	on	the
premises	of	a	classy	restaurant	in	the	Hotel	Bristol	in	Warsaw.	Filidor,	train
schedule	in	hand	and	accompanied	by	Mrs.	Professor	Filidor,	was	just	at	that
moment	studying	the	best	connections,	when	anti Filidor,	straight	from	the	train
and	out	of	breath,	rushed	into	the	restaurant	with	his	anlytical	travelingcompanion,	Flora	Gente	from	Messina,	on	his	arm.	We,	i.e.,	the	three	assistants
here	present,	Drs.	Teofil	Poklewski,	Teodor	Roklewski,	and	I,	realizing	the
gravity	of	the	situation,	immediately	began	taking	notes.
Anti Filidor	walked	up	to	our	table	and	silently	looked	daggers	at	the	Professor,
who	rose	to	his	feet.	At	first	they	tried	to	apply	spiritual	pressure.	The	Analyst
pressed	coolly	from	below,	the	Synthetist	responded	from	above,	with	a	gaze
charged	with	defiant	dignity.	When	the	duel	of	looks	gave	no	definitive	result,
the	two	spiritual	enemies	began	a	duel	of	words.	The	Doctor	and	master	of
Analysis	declared:
"Noodles!"	The	Synthetologue	responded:
"One	noodle!"	The	anti Filidor	roared:
"Noodles,	noodles,	namely	a	mixture	of	flour,	eggs,	and	water!"	Filidor	retorted
instantly:
"Noodle,	namely	the	higher	being	of	the	Noodle,	the	highest	Noodle	himself!"
His	eyes	flashed	lightning,	his	beard	fluttered,	it	was	clear	that	he	had	scored	a
victory.	The	Professor	of	High	Analysis	backed	off	a	few	steps	in	helpless	fury,
but	he	quickly	seized	on	a	dreadfully	brainy	concept,	namely—physical
weakling	that	he	was	compared	to	Filidor—he	went	for	Filidor's	wife,	beloved
above	all	else	by	the	old	and	revered	Professor.	The	course	of	events,	as	stated	in
the	official	Record,	continued	thus:
1.	Mrs.	Professor	Filidor	is	buxom,	fat,	quite	majestic,	she	sits,	says	nothing,
concentrates.
2.	Professor	Dr.	anti Filidor,	his	brainy	plan	in	mind,	placed	himself	opposite
Mrs.	Professor,	and	began	to	observe	her	with	a	look	that	stripped	her	of	all	her
clothing.	Mrs.	Filidor	shook	with	cold	and	in	shame.	Dr.	Professor	Filidor
silently	covered	her	with	a	traveling	rug	and	cast	a	withering	glance	full	of	the
utmost	disdain	at	the	arrogant	man.	He	revealed	thereby	a	trace	of	anxiety.
3.	Whereupon	anti Filidor	said	quietly:	"The	ear,	the	ear!"	and	he	burst	out	with
a	derisive	laugh.	Under	the	effect	of	these	words	the	ear	instantly	came	into
focus	and	became	lewd.	Filidor	ordered	his	wife	to	pull	her	hat	over	her	ears;
however,	this	was	of	little	use	because,	just	then,	anti Filidor	muttered,	as	if	to
himself:	"There	are	two	holes	in	the	nose,"	thereby	laying	bare	the	nostrils	in	the
venerable	Mrs.	Professor's	nose	in	a	manner	most	shameless,	as	well	as
analytical.	Since	there	was	no	way	in	which	her	nostrils	could	be	covered,	the
situation	became	grave	indeed.
4.	The	Professor	from	Leyden	threatened	to	call	the	police.	The	scale	of	victorywas	clearly	beginning	to	tilt	to	the	Colombo	side.	The	master	of	Analysis	said
brainily:
"Fingers,	the	fingers	of	your	hand,	five	fingers."
Unfortunately,	Mrs.	Professor's	obesity	was	not	sufficient	to	obviate	this	fact,
which	suddenly	stood	before	those	gathered	in	its	full,	unparalleled	vividness,
namely	the	presence	of	her	fingers.	There	they	were,	five	on	each	side.	Mrs.
Filidor,	totally	defiled,	tried	with	waning	strength	to	pull	on	her	gloves,	but—it's
simply	unbelievable—the	doctor	from	Colombo	made	a	spot	analysis	of	her
urine	and	roared	victoriously:
"H
2
OC
4
,	TPS,	a	few	leucocytes,	and	albumin!"
Everyone	rose.	Dr.	Professor	anti Filidor	took	his	leave	with	his	paramour,	who
burst	out	in	vulgar	laughter,	while	Professor	Filidor,	with	the	help	of	the
undersigned,	immediately	took	his	wife	to	the	hospital.
Signed:	T.	Poklewski,	T.	Roklewski,	and	Anton	Swistak	Assistants	The
following	morning	Roklewski,	Poklewski,	and	I,	together	with	the	Professor,	met
at	Mrs.	Filidor's	sickbed.	The	woman's	decomposition	continued	all	too
predictably.	Bitten	into	by	anti Filidor's	analytic	tooth,	she	was	losing	her
internal	cohesion.	From	time	to	time	she	moaned	numbly:	I	the	leg,	I	the	ear,	my
leg,	my	ear,	finger,	head,	leg—as	if	saying	goodbye	to	her	body	parts,	which	had
already	began	to	move	autonomously.	Her	whole	being	was	in	agony.	We	all
focused	on	a	search	for	immediate	measures	to	save	her.	But	there	were	no	such
measures.	After	consulting	with	Docent	S.	Lopatkin,	who	arrived	by	plane	from
Moscow	at	7:40	a.m.,	we	agreed	once	again	that	it	was	crucial	to	apply	the	most
drastically	synthetic	scientific	methods.	But	there	were	no	such	methods.	Filidor
concentrated	all	his	faculties	to	such	a	degree	that	we	took	a	step	back,
whereupon	he	said:
"A	slap	in	the	face!	A	slap	in	the	face,	and	a	sharp	one	at	that—of	all	body	parts
it's	the	face—a	slap	in	the	face	is	the	only	thing	that	can	restore	my	wife's	good
name	and	resynthesize	all	those	scattered	elements	in	the	most	honorable	manner
of	slapping	and	smacking.	To	work,	away!"
However,	it	was	no	easy	matter	to	find	the	world renowned	Analyst	in	the	city.
Not	until	that	evening	did	he	let	us	catch	up	with	him	in	a	high class	bar.	In	a
state	of	sober	drunkenness	he	downed	one	bottle	after	another,	and	the	more	he
drank	the	more	sober	he	became,	and	his	analytical	mistress	likewise.	Actually
they	were	more	drunk	with	sobriety	than	with	alcohol.	As	we	entered,	the
waiters,	white	as	sheets,	were	hiding	behind	the	counter	like	cowards	while	thecouple	silently	gave	themselves	over	to	various	ill defined,	coldblooded	orgies.
We	laid	our	plans.	The	Professor	was	to	feign	an	attack	with	his	right	hand	to	the
Analyst's	left	cheek,	after	which	he	was	to	deliver	a	slap	with	his	left	to	the
Analyst's	right	cheek,	while	we—i.e.,	the	Doctor	Assistants	of	Warsaw
University,	Poklewski,	Roklewski,	and	I,	as	well	as	Docent	S.	Lopatkin—were
to	proceed	forthwith	with	writing	our	report.	The	plan	was	simple,	the	action
uncomplicated.	But	the	Professor's	raised	hand	fell	to	his	side.	We,	the	witnesses,
stood	aghast.	There	was	no	cheek!	There	was,	I	repeat,	no	cheek	to	be	slapped,
only	two	little	roses,	and	something	like	a	wreath	of	little	doves!
With	demonic	cleverness	anti Filidor	had	foreseen	and	forestalled	Filidor's
plans.	That	sober	Bacchus	had	tattooed	two	little	roses	and	a	vignette	of	little
doves	on	each	cheek!	As	a	result,	the	cheeks,	and	thereby	the	slap	in	the	face
intended	by	Filidor,	lost	all	meaning,	let	alone	any	higher	meaning.	Because
indeed—a	slap	delivered	at	the	roses	and	the	little	doves	would	no	longer	be	a
slap	in	the	face—it	would	be	more	like	hitting	wallpaper.	Since	we	could	not
allow	a	widely	respected	pedagogue	and	educator	of	youth	to	become	the	object
of	ridicule	by	pounding	wallpaper	because	his	wife	was	sick,	we	strongly
advised	him	against	an	action	that	he	would	later	regret.
"You	dog!"	roared	the	old	man.	"You	despicable,	oh,	you	despicable,	despicable
dog!"
"You	heap	of	things!"	replied	the	Analyst	with	a	dreadful,	analytical	disdain.	"I
too	am	a	heap.	If	you	wish—kick	me	in	the	abdomen.	You	won't	be	kicking	m	e
in	the	abdomen,	you'll	be	kicking	my	abdomen—nothing	more.	You	wanted	to
attack	my	cheeks	by	slapping	them,	didn't	you?	You	can	attack	my	cheek	but	not
me.	There	is	no	me.	No	me	at	all.	No	me!"
"I'll	get	at	you	yet!	God	willing,	I'll	get	at	you!"	"For	the	time	being	my	cheeks
are	slap proof!"	anti Filidor	smirked.	Flora	Gente,	sitting	next	to	him,	burst	out
laughing,	the	cosmic	doctor	of	analysis	cast	a	lascivious	look	at	her	and	then
departed.	Flora	Gente,	however,	remained.	She	sat	on	a	high	stool	and	looked	at
us	with	the	spent	eyes	of	a	totally	analyzed	parrot	and	cow.	At	once,	that	is	at
8:40	a.m.,	we	proceeded—Professor	Filidor,	the	two	medics,	Docent	Lopatkin,
and	I—to	our	conference;	Docent	Lopatkin,	as	usual,	wielded	the	pen.	The
conference	took	the	following	course.
All	Three	Doctors	of	Law	Let	it	be	known	that	we	see	no	possibility	of	settling
the	conflict	honorably,	and	we	advise	the	Right	Honorable	Professor	to	ignore
the	insult,	as	coming	from	an	individual	unable	to	render	honorable	satisfaction.Professor	Dr.	Filidor	How	can	I	ignore	it	while	my	wife	lies	dying?
Docent	S.	Lopatkin	Your	wife	is	beyond	saving.
Dr.	Filidor	Don't	say	it,	don't	say	it!	Oh,	a	slap	in	the	face,	that's	the	only	remedy.
But	there's	no	chance	of	a	slap.	No	cheeks.	There's	no	means	of	godly	synthesis.
There's	no	honor!	There's	no	God!	Yet—there	are	cheeks!	There	does	exist	a	slap
in	the	face!	There	is	God!	Honor!	Synthesis!
I	
I	see	that	logical	thinking	is	failing	you,	Professor.	Either	there	are	cheeks,	or
there	are	not.
Filidor	You	forget,	gentlemen,	that	there	are	still	my	two	cheeks.	There	are	no
cheeks	of	his,	but	mine	are	still	here.	We	can	still	play	the	card	of	my	two
untouched	cheeks.	Gentlemen,	try	to	understand	my	thinking—I	can't	slap	him
in	the	face,	but	he	can	slap	me—and	whether	it's	me	him	or	he	me	makes	no
difference,	it	will	still	be	a	Slap	in	the	Face	and	it	will	still	be	Synthesis!
"All	well	and	good!	But	how	are	we	to	make	him	slap	you,	Professor?!"
"How	to	make	him	slap	you,	Professor?!"
"How	to	make	him	slap	you,	Professor?!!"
"Gentlemen,"	the	brilliant	thinker	answered	with	concentration,	"he	has	cheeks,
and	so	do	I.	The	principle	is	that	of	analogy,	and	I	will	therefore	act	not	so	much
logically	as	analogically.	There	is	more	certainty	
per	analogiam,	
because	nature
is	ruled	to	some	extent	by	analogy.	If	he	is	the	king	of	Analysis,	then	I	am	the
king	of	Synthesis.	If	he	has	cheeks,	I	too	have	cheeks.	If	I	have	my	wife,	he	has
his	mistress.	If	he	has	analyzed	my	wife,	I'll	synthesize	his	mistress,	and	I	will
thus	wrench	from	him	the	slap	in	the	face	which	he	is	so	loath	to	give	me!	Since
I	can't	slap	him	in	the	face	I'll	provoke	him,	I'll	make	him	slap	my	face."	And
without	further	ado	he	beckoned	to	Flora	Gente.
We	fell	silent.	She	came	up	to	us,	all	her	body	parts	in	motion;	she	squinted	at
me	with	one	eye	and	at	the	Professor	with	the	other,	she	bared	her	teeth	toward
Stefan	Lopatkin,	and	she	thrust	her	bosom	toward	Roklewski,	while	wiggling
her	behind	in	the	direction	of	Poklewski.	The	resulting	impression	was	such	that
the	Docent	whispered:
"Are	you	really	going	to	take	on	with	your	synthesis	these	fifty	disparate	pieces,
this	soulless,	for hire	combination	of	(dp	+	pd)	to	the	nth	power?"
It	was	the	universal	Synthetologue's	attribute	never	to	lose	hope.	He	invited
Flora	Gente	to	our	table,	treated	her	to	a	glass	of	Cinzano,	and,	to	test	her,	he
began	synthetically:
"The	soul,	the	soul."She	answered	in	a	similar	but	slightly	different	vein,	she	answered	with	part	of
something.
"I!"	the	Professor	said	earnestly,	searchingly,	and	in	the	hope	of	awakening	her
dissipated	self.	"I!"
She	replied:
"Oh,	'you,'	very	good,	five	zlotys."
"Unity!"	heatedly	exclaimed	the	Professor.	"Higher	Unity!	The	One!"
"It's	all	one	to	me,"	she	said	indifferently,	"whether	it's	an	old	man	or	a	child."
We	breathlessly	watched	this	hellish	analyst	of	the	night	whom	anti Filidor	had
trained	as	he	pleased,	perhaps	he	had	even	raised	her	for	himself	since	her
childhood.
The	Creator	of	Synthetic	Science,	however,	would	not	desist.	A	period	of	great
stress	and	strain	followed.	He	read	her	the	first	two	chants	from	
Spirit	King,	
and
for	this	she	demanded	ten	zlotys.	He	had	a	long	and	inspired	conversation	with
her	about	Almighty	Love,	the	Love	which	embraces	and	unites	us	all,	for	which
she	took	eleven	zlotys.	He	read	to	her	two	run of the mill	novels	by	the	leading
female	authors	on	the	subject	of	revival	through	Love,	for	which	she	charged	a
hundred	and	fifty	zlotys,	and	she	wouldn't	be	talked	down	one	whit.	When,
however,	he	tried	to	awaken	her	dignity,	she	demanded	no	less,	no	more	than
fifty two	zlotys.
"One	has	to	pay	for	kinkiness,	you	old	fogey,"	she	said,	"but	it's	tax free."
And	letting	loose	her	dumb	owl	eyes,	she	remained	impassive,	expenses	grew,
while	somewhere	downtown	anti Filidor	laughed	up	his	sleeve	at	the
hopelessness	of	these	efforts	and	measures...
At	a	conference	in	which	Dr.	Lopatkin	and	the	three	Docents	took	part,	the
illustrious	researcher	reported	his	defeat	in	the	following	words:
"This	has	cost	me,	in	all,	a	few	hundred	zlotys,	I	truly	don't	see	any	way	of
synthesizing	her,	I	tried	all	higher	Unities	in	vain—Humanity	for	example,	but
she	keeps	turning	everything	into	money	and	giving	back	the	change.	Humanity
priced	at	forty two	zlotys	ceases	to	be	a	Unity.	I	really	don't	know	what	to	do.
Meanwhile,	my	wife	is	at	the	hospital	losing	what	remains	of	her	inner	cohesion.
Her	leg	sets	off	for	a	walk	round	the	room,	and	after	a	nap—my	wife,	not	the
leg,	of	course—must	hold	on	to	it	with	her	hands,	but	her	hands	don't	want	to	do
it,	what	a	terrible	anarchy,	what	a	terrible	free for all.
Dr.	of	Medicine	T.	Poklewski	Meanwhile,	anti Filidor	is	spreading	rumors	that
you,	Professor,	are	a	disagreeable	maniac.Docent	Lopafkin	However,	could	you	possibly	get	through	to	her	by	means	of
money?	Since	she	changes	everything	into	money	couldn't	you	work	on	her	with
money?	I'm	sorry,	I'm	not	quite	sure	what	I	mean,	but	there	is	something	like	this
in	nature—for	example,	I	once	had,	as	a	patient,	a	woman	who	suffered	from
shyness,	I	couldn't	treat	her	with	audacity	because	she	could	not	assimilate
audacity,	so	I	gave	her	such	a	dose	of	shyness	that	she	couldn't	stand	it	any
longer,	and	therefore,	because	she	couldn't,	she	became	audacious,	all	of	a
sudden	she	became	exceedingly	audacious.	The	best	method	
per	se	
is	to	turn	the
sleeve	and	its	lining	inside	out,	be	that	as	it	may.	Be	that	as	it	may.	You'd	have	to
synthesize	her	with	money,	however,	I	admit,	I	don't	see	how...
Filidor	Money,	money	...	Yet	money	is	always	a	number,	a	sum,	it	has	nothing	in
common	with	Unity,	actually	only	the	grosz	is	indivisible,	but	the	grosz	isn't
going	to	impress	her.	Unless	.	.	.	unless	.	.	.	gentlemen,	what	if	I	gave	her	a	sum
that	would	spin	her	head?	Spin	her	head?	Gentlemen	...	enough	to	spin	her	head?
We	fell	silent,	Filidor	jumped	to	his	feet,	his	black	beard	fluttering.	He
succumbed	to	one	of	those	manic	states	to	which	a	genius	succumbs	regularly
every	seven	years.	He	sold	two	of	his	townhouses	and	a	villa	in	the	suburbs,	and
then	he	changed	the	sum	of	850,000	zlotys	thus	obtained	into	single	zlotys.
Poklewski	watched	this	in	wonder,	this	shallow	physician	from	the	provinces
had	never	been	able	to	understand	genius,	he	never	understood	and	never	would.
And	in	the	meantime	the	philosopher,	self assured,	issued	a	sarcastic	invitation
to	anti Filidor,	who,	responding	to	sarcasm	with	sarcasm,	arrived	at	nine thirty
sharp	in	the	lounge	of	the	restaurant	Alkazar,	where	the	decisive	experiment	was
to	take	place.	The	scientists	did	not	shake	hands,	and	the	master	of	Analysis
broke	into	a	dry	and	malicious	laughter:
"Well,	go	for	it,	sir,	go	for	it!	My	girl	isn't	so	eager	to	compose	as	your	wife	is	to
decompose,	I'm	quite	sure	on	that	score."
And	he	too	was	gradually	falling	into	a	hypomanic	state.	Dr.	Poklewski	held	the
pen.	Lopatkin	held	the	paper.
Professor	Filidor	approached	the	matter	at	first	by	placing	on	the	table	only	a
single	zloty.	Gente	didn't	react.	He	placed	a	second	zloty,	nothing,	he	added	a
third,	again	nothing,	but	at	four	zlotys	she	said:
"Ooh,	four	zlotys."
At	five	she	yawned,	and	at	six	she	coolly	said:
"Now	there,	litde	old	man,	you're	off	into	the	clouds	again?"
Not	until	ninety seven	did	we	note	the	first	signs	of	surprise,	and	at	hundred	andfifteen	her	eyes,	hitherto	wandering	between	Dr.	Poklewski,	the	Docent,	and
myself,	were	now	beginning,	ever	so	slightly,	to	synthesize	on	the	money.
At	one	hundred	thousand	Filidor	breathed	heavily,	anti Filidor	became
somewhat	anxious,	while	the	courtesan,	heterogeneous	up	to	this	point,	showed
some	signs	of	concentration.	She	was	riveted	as	she	watched	the	growing	heap,
which	by	now	was	no	longer	merely	a	heap,	and	although	she	tried	to	count,	her
arithmetic	didn't	quite	add	up.	The	sum	ceased	to	be	a	mere	sum,	it	was
becoming	something	unfathomable,	unthinkable,	something	more	than	a	sum,
expanding	the	brain	with	its	enormity,	equal	to	the	enormity	of	the	Heavens.
Flora	let	go	a	hollow	groan.	The	Analyst	lunged	to	rescue	her,	but	both	doctors
held	him	back	with	all	their	force—he	begged	her	in	vain	to	break	up	the	whole
into	hundreds	or	five	hundreds,	but	the	whole	would	not	be	split	up.	When	the
triumphant	high	priest	of	logarithmic	knowledge	dispensed	everything	he	had
and	sealed	the	heap,	or	rather	the	enormity,	this	mount,	this	Mount	Sinai	of	cash,
with	one	single,	indivisible	grosz,	it	was	as	if	a	God	had	entered	the	courtesan,
she	rose	to	her	feet	and	displayed	all	the	synthetic	symptoms—crying,	sighing,
smiling,	pondering,	and	she	said:
"This	is	me,	gentlemen.	This	is	me.	This	is	my	higher	self."
Filidor	shouted	in	triumph,	and	then	anti Filidor,	with	a	cry	of	horror,	tore	away
from	the	medics'	arms	and	slapped	Filidor	in	the	face.
The	shot	was	a	thunderbolt—it	was	the	lightning	of	synthesis	torn	from	analytic
entrails,	shattering	the	murky	darkness.	The	Docent	and	the	medics,	highly
moved,	congratulated	the	Professor	thus	defiled	at	last,	while	his	sworn	enemy
writhed	by	the	wall	and	groaned	in	torment.	But	once	the	course	was	set	on	the
path	of	honor,	no	amount	of	howling	could	stop	it,	because	the	affair,	thus	far	not
one	of	honor,	now	rolled	onto	the	customary	tracks	of	honor.
Professor	Dr.	G.	L.	Filidor	from	Leyden	nominated	two	seconds	in	the	persons
of	Doc.	Lopafkin	and	myself—Professor	Dr.	P.	T.	Momsen	with	the	genteel	title
of	anti Filidor	nominated	two	seconds	in	the	persons	of	both	his	assistants—
Filidor's	seconds	honorably	called	out	anti Filidor's	seconds,	while	the	latter
called	out	Filidor's	seconds.	At	each	of	these	honorable	steps	synthesis	grew.	The
Colombian	writhed	as	if	on	hot	coals.	The	Leydenian,	however,	smiling	and	in
silence,	stroked	his	long	beard.	While	in	the	city	hospital	the	sick	Mrs.	Professor
began	to	unite	her	parts,	with	a	barely	audible	voice	she	demanded	milk,	and	her
physicians	took	heart.	Honor	peeked	from	behind	the	clouds	and	sweetly	smiled
on	people.	The	final	encounter	would	take	place	the	following	Tuesday	morningat	seven	sharp.
Dr.	Roklewski	was	to	hold	the	pen,	Docent	Lopatkin	the	pistols,	Poklewski	was
to	hold	the	paper,	and	I	the	coats.	The	undefeatable	combatant	from	under	the
sign	of	Synthesis	entertained	no	doubts.	I	remember	what	he	told	me	the
previous	morning.
"My	son,"	he	said,	"he	can	be	felled	just	as	I	can,	but	whoever	falls,	my	spirit
will	be	victorious,	for	this	is	not	about	death	but	about	the	quality	of	death,	and
the	quality	of	death	will	be	synthetic.	If	he	falls	he	will	pay	tribute	to	Synthesis
—if	he	kills	me	he	will	kill	me	in	a	synthetic	mode.	Thus	my	victory	will
continue	beyond	the	grave."
Thus,	deeply	moved	and	wanting	to	celebrate	the	more	splendidly	his	moment	of
glory,	he	invited	the	two	ladies,	i.e.,	his	wife	and	Flora,	to	watch	from	the
sidelines,	in	the	role	of	ordinary	attendants.	Yet	ill	forebodings	gnawed	at	me.	I
dreaded	something—but	what	was	it?	I	had	no	idea,	the	fear	of	not	knowing
tormented	me	all	night,	and	not	until	I	was	on	the	field	did	I	realize	why.	The
morning	was	picture perfect,	bright	and	clear.	The	spiritual	opponents	stood
opposite	each	other,	Filidor	bowed	to	anti Filidor,	anti Filidor	bowed	to	Filidor.
It	was	then	that	I	realized	what	I	had	been	dreading.	It	was	symmetry—the
situation	was	symmetrical,	and	therein	lay	its	strength,	but	also	its	weakness.
The	situation	was	such	that	each	of	Filidor's	moves	had	to	correspond	to	each	of
anti Filidor's	analogous	moves,	and	Filidor	had	the	first	move.	If	Filidor	bowed,
anti Filidor	also	would	have	to	bow.	If	Filidor	fired,	anti Filidor	also	would	have
to	fire.	And	everything,	I	stress,	had	to	occur	along	the	axis	that	led	through	both
combatants,	which	was	the	axis	of	the	entire	situation.	Well	now!	What	will
happen	if	anti Filidor	ducks	to	the	side?	If	he	jumps	aside?	What	if	he	plays	a
prank	and	somehow	escapes	the	iron	laws	of	symmetry	as	well	as	analogy?
Indeed,	what	passions	and	treacheries	might	lurk	in	anti Filidor's	brainy	head?	I
was	fighting	with	my	thoughts	when	suddenly	Professor	Filidor	raised	his	pistol
and	aimed	concentrically	at	his	opponent's	heart	and	fired.	He	fired	and	missed.
He	missed.	Then,	in	his	turn,	the	Analyst	raised	his	pistol	and	aimed	at	his
opponent's	heart.	Yes,	yes,	we	were	almost	ready	to	proclaim	victory.	Yes,	yes,	it
seemed	that	since	the	other	had	synthetically	fired	at	the	heart,	this	one	must	also
fire	at	the	heart.	It	seemed	there	was	no	other	solution,	there	was	no	side	wicket
for	the	intellect.	But	suddenly,	in	the	blink	of	an	eye	and	with	the	greatest	effort,
the	Analyst	uttered	a	squeak,	whined,	deviated	slightly	to	the	side,	led	the	barrel
of	the	pistol	away	from	the	axis	and	shot	to	the	side,	at	what?—at	the	little	finger
of	Mrs.	Professor	Filidor,	who	stood	nearby	with	Flora	Gente.	The	shot	wasmasterful!	The	finger	fell off.	Mrs.	Filidor,	surprised,	lifted	her	hand	to	her	lips.
While	we,	the	seconds,	momentarily	lost	our	composure	and	gave	a	shout	of
admiration.
Then	something	terrible	happened.	The	High	Professor	of	Synthesis	could	not
contain	himself.	Fascinated	by	the	Analyst's	masterful	aim,	by	symmetry,
bewildered	by	our	cry	of	admiration,	also	veered	his	aim	to	one	side	and	shot	at
the	little	finger	of	Flora	Gente's	hand,	then	laughed	briefly,	dryly,	gutturally.
Gente	lifted	her	hand	to	her	lips,	we	gave	a	shout	of	admiration.
The	Analyst	then	fired	again,	knocking	off	another	of	Mrs.	Professor's	fingers,
and	she	lifted	her	hand	to	her	lips—we	gave	a	shout	of	admiration,	a	quarter	of	a
second	later,	the	Synthetist's	shot,	fired	with	unerring	certainty	from	a	distance
of	seventeen	meters,	knocked	off	Flora	Gente's	analogous	finger.	Gente	lifted	her
hand	to	her	lips,	we	gave	a	shout	of	admiration.	And	on	it	went.	The	firing
continued	nonstop,	fast	and	furious	and	as	glorious	as	glory	itself,	and	fingers,
ears,	noses,	teeth	fell	like	leaves	tossed	by	the	wind	while	we,	the	seconds,	could
hardly	keep	up	with	our	shouts	torn	from	within	us	by	the	lightning
marksmanship.	Both	ladies	were	shorn	bare	of	all	their	natural	appendages	and
protrusions,	they	didn't	fall	dead	simply	because	they	too	could	not	keep	up,	but
anyway,	I	think	they	were	delighted—being	exposed	to	such	marksmanship.
Finally	the	bullets	ran	out.	With	the	last	shot	the	master	from	Colombo	pierced
the	apex	of	Mrs.	Professor	Filidor's	lung,	and	the	master	from	Leyden
immediately	responded	by	piercing	the	apex	of	Flora	Gente's	lung,	once	more
we	gave	a	shout	of	admiration,	and	silence	fell.	Both	torsos	died	and	slid	to	the
ground—the	duelists	looked	at	each	other.
Now	what?	They	looked	at	each	other,	and	neither	knew—what	now?	Actually
what?	There	were	no	more	bullets.	In	any	case	both	corpses	already	lay	on	the
ground.	There	was	nothing	to	do.	It	was	almost	ten	o'clock.	Actually	Analysis
had	won,	but	so	what?	Absolutely	nothing.	Synthesis	could	have	won	equally
well,	and	there	would	have	been	nothing	to	that,	either.	Filidor	picked	up	a	stone
and	threw	it	at	a	sparrow,	but	he	missed	and	the	sparrow	flew	away.	The	sun
began	to	scorch	us,	anti Filidor	picked	up	a	clod	and	threw	it	at	a	tree	stump—he
hit	it.	In	the	meantime	a	hen	chanced	Filidor's	way,	he	aimed	at	it,	hit	it,	the	hen
ran	away	and	hid	in	the	bushes.	The	scientists	left	their	positions	and	departed—
each	in	his	own	direction.
By	evening	anti Filidor	was	in	Jeziorna,	Filidor	in	Vaver.	One	hunted	for	crows
by	a	haystack,	the	other	found	an	out of the way	lamppost	and	aimed	at	it	from	a
distance	of	fifty	paces.And	so	they	wandered	around	the	world	aiming	with	whatever	they	could	at
whatever	they	could.	They	sang	songs,	but	they	liked	breaking	windows	best,
they	also	liked	to	stand	on	a	balcony	and	spit	upon	the	hats	of	passersby,	even
more	so	if	they	were	able	to	target	some	fat	cats	riding	by	in	a	carriage.	Filidor
became	so	good	at	it	that	he	could	spit	at	somebody	on	a	balcony	from	the
sidewalk.	Anti Filidor	could	extinguish	a	candle	by	throwing	a	box	of	matches	at
the	flame.	But	best	of	all	they	liked	to	hunt	frogs	with	a	BB	gun	or	to	hunt
sparrows	with	a	bow	and	arrow,	or	else	they	threw	pieces	of	paper	and	blades	of
grass	from	a	bridge	onto	the	water.	But	their	greatest	delight	was	to	buy	a	child's
balloon	and	run	after	it	through	fields	and	forests—hey,	ho!	and	watch	it	burst
with	a	bang	as	if	shot	with	an	invisible	bullet.
And	whenever	anyone	from	the	world	of	science	reminisced	with	them	about
their	splendid	past,	their	spiritual	battles,	about	Analysis	and	Synthesis	and	their
glory	irretrievably	lost,	they	would	reply	dreamily:
"Yes,	yes,	I	remember	that	duel...	the	pop popping	was	great!"
"But	Professor,"	I	exclaimed,	and	Roklewski,	who	in	the	meantime	had	married
and	started	a	family	on	Krucza	Street,	joined	in,	"but	Professor,	you	talk	like	a
child!"
To	which	the	old	man	gone	childish	replied:
"The	child	runs	deep	in	everything."6	Seduction	and	Further	Driving	Me	into	Youth
At	the	very	moment	when	the	terrible	psychophysical	rape	of	Syphon	by
Kneadus	reached	its	climax	the	door	opened	and	the	
deus	ex	machina,	
Pimko—
ever,	and	every	inch	his	most	infallible	self—entered	the	classroom.
"Oh,	good,	I	see	you're	playing	ball,	children,	little	bailie!"	he	exclaimed,	though
we	were	not	playing	ball,	there	wasn't	even	any	little	bailie	around.	"Little	bailie,
you're	playing	bailie,	oh,	how	nicely	you're	throwing	the	bailie	to	each	other,	and
see	how	nicely	one	of	you	is	catching	it!"	And	noticing	the	feverish red	blotches
on	my	otherwise	pale	and	fear shrunken	face,	he	added:	"Oh,	what	rosy	little
cheeks!	School	seems	to	agree	with	you,	Joey,	and	so	does	playing	bailie.	Come
along	now,"	he	said,	"I'll	take	you	to	your	lodgings	at	Mrs.	Youngblood's,	I've
already	settled	the	whole	matter	with	her	over	the	phone.	I	found	lodgings	for
you	at	the	Youngbloods'.	It	would	be	most	inappropriate,	at	your	age,	to	have	an
apartment	of	your	own	downtown.	As	of	today—your	place	is	at	Mrs.
Youngblood's."
He	then	led	the	way	and,	to	kindle	my	interest,	told	me	what	he	knew	about	Mr.
Youngblood,	a	construction	design	engineer,	and	about	Mrs.	Youngblood,	the
Mrs.	Engineer.	"It's	a	modern	household,"	he	remarked,	"modern	and
naturalistic,	favoring	the	trends,	and	foreign	to	my	ideology.	Now,	Joey,	I've
noticed	an	affectation	in	you,	a	posturing,	you're	still	trying	to	pass	for	an	adult
—well,	the	Youngbloods	will	cure	you	of	this	unpleasant	shortcoming,	they'll
teach	you	how	to	behave	naturally.	But—I	forgot	to	tell	you—there's	also	a
young	daughter,	Miss	Zuta	Youngblood,	a	schoolgirl,"	he	added	under	his
breath,	clasping	my	hand	and	giving	me	that	pedagogical	squint	from	behind	his
spectacles.	"The	schoolgirl,"	he	said,	"she's	modern	too.	Hmm,	it's	not	the	best
company,	and	fraught	with	danger...	but	on	the	other	hand	there	is	nothing	like	a
modern	schoolgirl	to	lure	one	to	youth	.	.	.	she'll	inspire	you	with	young blooded
patriotism,	I	can	assure	you."
Streetcars	rolled	by.	There	were	flowerpots	on	windowsills.	Some	fellow	threw	a
plum	pit	at	Pimko	from	a	balcony,	but	missed.
What?	What	was	this?	A	schoolgirl?	In	an	instant	I	grasped	Pimko's	plan—he
wanted	to	use	the	schoolgirl	to	imprison	me	in	youth,	once	and	for	all.	He
figured	that	if	I	fell	in	love	with	a	young	schoolgirl	I	would	no	longer	want	to	be
an	adult.	At	home,	and	in	school—not	a	moment's	letup,	not	a	chance	to	bolt
through	a	crack.	There	wasn't	a	minute	to	lose.	I	hurriedly	bit	his	finger	and	took
to	my	heels.	I	saw	an	adult,	a	woman,	standing	on	a	corner,	so	it	was	toward	herI	sped—	my	face	contorted,	stunned,	and	terror	stricken—the	farther	from
Pimko	and	his	horrible	schoolgirl	the	better.	Like	lightning,	the	Great	Belittler
was	upon	me	in	a	bound	or	two	and	caught	me	by	the	collar.
"To	the	schoolgirl!"	he	shouted,	"to	the	schoolgirl!	To	youth!	To	the
Youngbloods!"
He	shoved	me	into	a	horse drawn	cab	and	had	us	driven	to	the	schoolgirl,	and	so
we	trotted	through	busy	streets	full	of	people,	vehicles,	and	birdies'	songs.
"Let's	go,	let's	go,	why	are	you	looking	back,	there's	no	one	behind	you,	I'm	the
only	one	beside	you."
Clasping	my	hand	and	drooling	at	the	thought	of	where	we	were	going,	he
purred:
"To	the	schoolgirl,	to	the	modern	schoolgirl!	Trust	the	schoolgirl	to	enamor	him
with	youth!	Trust	the	Youngbloods	to	belittle	him!	Trust	them	to	deal	him	the
perfect	pupa!	Giddy up,	giddy up,	giddy up!"	he	shouted	until	the	horse	began
kicking,	and	the	cabdriver,	settling	himself	on	the	coach box,	turned	his	back	on
Pimko	with	the	boundless	disdain	of	the	common	man.	Yet	Pimko	sat	there	in	a
manner	most	absolute.
However,	at	the	threshold	of	a	cheap	little	house	in	Staszyc	or	Lu becki,	one	of
the	suburbs	inhabited	by	the	intelligentsia,	he	seemed	to	waver	and	slump,	and—
oh,	marvel	of	marvels!—he	lost	some	of	his	absolutism.
"Joey,"	he	whispered,	quivering	and	shaking	his	head.	"I'm	making	a	great
sacrifice	for	you.	I'm	doing	this	solely	for	the	sake	of	your	youth.	It's	entirely	for
the	sake	of	your	youth	that	I'm	risking	an	encounter	with	a	modern	schoolgirl.
Ooh hoo,	a	schoolgirl,	a	modern	schoolgirl!"
And	he	kissed	my	cheek,	trying	to	secure	my	goodwill	out	of	fear,	it	seemed,
and,	at	the	same	time,	as	if	kissing	me	goodbye.	When	we	got	out	of	the	cab,
and,	tapping	the	ground	with	his	cane	and	greatly	vexed,	he	proceeded	to	cite
and	recite,	to	declaim	aphorisms	and	to	propound	his	thoughts,	opinions,	and
ideas,	all	of	the	best	quality,	most	classically	prof like,	yet	as	if	he	were	an	ailing
prof	whose	very	existence	was	being	threatened.	He	dropped	the	names	of	some
of	his	literary	friends,	who	were	unfamiliar	to	me,	and	I	heard	him	softly	quoting
their	favorable	opinions	of	him,	and	in	turn	expressing	his	favorable	opinion	of
them.	Three	times	he	signed	his	name	with	a	pencil	on	a	wall,	"T	Pimko,"	as	if
he	were	Antaeus	drawing	strength	from	his	signature.	I	looked	at	the	teacher
with	surprise.	What	was	this?	Could	it	be	that	he	too	was	scared	of	the	modern
schoolgirl?	Or	was	he	just	pretending?	Why	on	earth	would	such	a	seasoned	profbe	scared	of	a	schoolgirl?	But	just	then	the	maid	opened	the	door,	and	we	went
in—the	professor	rather	timidly,	without	his	usual	air	of	superiority,	and	I	with
my	face	crumpled	up	like	a	dishrag,	pale,	stunned,	and	stupefied.	Pimko	tapped
the	floor	with	his	cane	and	asked:	"Are	Mr.	and	Mrs.	Youngblood	home?"	At
that	moment	an	inside	door	opened	and	a	schoolgirl	came	toward	us.	Modern
indeed.
Sixteen	years	old,	in	a	skirt,	sweater,	and	sneakers,	athletic	looking,	easygoing,
smooth,	limber,	agile,	and	impudent!	The	sight	of	her	made	my	spirit	and	my
face	freeze	in	fear.	I	understood	at	a	glance here	was	a	powerful	presence,
probably	more	powerful	than	Pimko	himself,	and	equally	absolute	in	her	way,
even	more	so	than	Syphon.	She	reminded	me	of	someone—but	who,	who?—ah,
she	reminded	me	of	Kopyrda!	Remember	Kopyrda?	Just	like	him	but	tougher,
similar	in	type	but	more	intense,	a	perfect	schoolgirl	in	her	school girlishness,
and	absolutely	modern	in	her	modernity.	And	doubly	young—first	by	age	and
secondly	by	modernity—it	was	youth	multiplied	by	youth.	I	was	as	frightened	as
someone	who	comes	upon	a	presence	stronger	than	oneself,	moreover,	my	fear
intensified	when	I	saw	that	it	was	the	prof	who	was	scared	of	her,	rather	than	she
of	the	prof,	that	he	was	somewhat	unsure	of	himself	while	exchanging	greetings
with	this	modern	schoolgirl.
"Greetings,	young	lady,"	he	called	out	half cheerily	and	affecting	refinement.
"Miss	Zuta	is	not	at	the	beach?	On	the	Vistula?	Is	Mommy	home?	How's	the
water	in	the	swimming	pool,	eh?	Cold?	That's	good	for	you!	In	the	olden	days	I
myself	used	to	swim	in	cold	water!"
What	was	this?	I	heard	in	Pimko's	voice	old	age	wheedling	up	to	youth	with
athletics,	obsequious	old	age—I	took	a	step	back.	The	schoolgirl	didn't	answer
Pimko—just	looked—she	placed	between	her	teeth	a	small	wrench	which	she
had	held	in	her	right	hand,	she	extended	her	left	hand	with	an	unceremonious
indifference,	as	if	he	were	not	Pimko	...	This	disconcerted	the	professor,	he	didn't
know	what	to	do	with	the	youthful	left	hand	stretched	out	to	him,	so	he	finally
clasped	it	in	both	his	hands.	I	bowed.	She	took	the	wrench	from	between	her
teeth	and	said,	matter of factly:
"Mother	isn't	in,	she	should	be	back	soon.	Please	come	in	..."
And	she	led	us	into	a	modern	livingroom,	took	her	place	by	a	window,	while	we
took	our	seats	on	a	sofa.
"Mommy	is	probably	at	a	committee	meeting,"	the	professor	attempted	small
talk.The	modern	one	said:
"I	don't	know."
The	walls	were	painted	pale	blue,	the	curtains	were	cream	colored,	a	radio	stood
on	a	little	shelf,	the	cute	furniture	was	contemporary,	consistently	modern,	clean,
smooth,	simple,	with	two	built in	closets	and	a	little	table.	The	schoolgirl	stood
at	the	window,	unmindful	of	anyone's	presence	in	the	room,	and	she	picked	at
her	skin,	which	was	peeling	off	her	sunburned	shoulders.	As	far	as	she	was
concerned	we	were	not	there—she	could	not	care	less	about	Pimko—and
minutes	passed.	Pimko	sat,	crossed	his	legs,	folded	his	hands,	and	twiddled	his
thumbs,	just	like	someone	who's	being	ignored.	He	stirred	in	his	seat,	cleared	his
throat	a	couple	of	times,	and	coughed,	hoping	to	keep	the	conversation	going,
but	the	modern	one	turned	toward	the	window,	her	back	to	us,	and	continued
picking	at	her	skin.	He	didn't	say	a	word,	he	merely	sat,	yet	his	sitting	thus—
without	conversation—seemed	incomplete,	imperfect.	I	rubbed	my	eyes.	What
was	going	on?	Something	most	certainly	was—but	what?	Was	it	Pimko's
imperious	yet	incomplete	sitting?	An	abandoned	prof?	A	prof?	The
incompleteness	was	clamoring	for	completion—like	those	nagging	gaps	when
one	thing	is	ending	and	another	has	not	yet	began.	And	a	void	opens	up	in	one's
head.	I	suddenly	saw	the	prof's	old	age	showing.	I	hadn't	noticed	until	now	that
the	professor	was	over	fifty,	never	before	had	this	dawned	on	me,	as	if	the
absolute	prof	were	an	eternal	and	timeless	being.	Is	he	old	or	is	he	a	professor?
How	so old	or	a	professor?	Why	not	an	old	professor?	No,	that's	not	the	point,
it's	that	something	is	brewing	here	(they	were	in	cahoots	against	me—there	was
no	doubt	about	that).	O	God,	why	is	he	sitting?	Why	had	he	come	here	to	sit
beside	me	with	the	schoolgirl?	His	sitting	was	all	the	more	painful	because	I	sat
together	with	him.	If	I	had	been	standing	it	wouldn't	have	been	so	terrible.	But
getting	up	was	tremendously	difficult,	and,	strictly	speaking,	there	was	no	reason
to	get	up.	And	that	isn't	even	the	point—but	rather	why	does	he	sit	with	this
schoolgirl,	why	sit	agedly	with	a	young	schoolgirl?	Have	pity!	But	there	is	no
pity.	Why	does	he	sit	with	the	schoolgirl?	Why	is	his	old	age	not	just	a	simple
old	age,	rather	than	a	schoolgirl	old	age?	How	so—old	age	with	a	schoolgirl?
What	is	the	meaning	of—a	schoolgirl	old	age?	Suddenly	things	became	horrible,
and	yet	I	couldn't	run	away.	A	schoolgirl	old	age—a	young old	old	age—these
were	the	incomplete,	defective,	hideous	formulas	galloping	through	my	brain.
And	suddenly	I	heard	singing	in	the	room.	I	couldn't	believe	my	ears.	The	prof
was	singing	an	aria	to	the	schoolgirl.	Startled,	I	came	to	my	senses.	No,	not
singing,	he	was	humming—hurt	by	the	schoolgirl's	indifference,	and	to	stress	herinappropriate	behavior,	her	bad	manners	and	brashness,	Pimko	hummed	a	few
bars	from	an	operetta.	Was	he	really	singing?	Yes,	she	had	forced	the
granddaddy	to	sing!	Was	this	the	same	awesome,	absolute,	crafty	Pimko,
become	this	granddaddy,	abandoned	on	the	sofa,	and	forced	to	sing	for	the
schoolgirl?
I	felt	very	weak.	After	the	many	ordeals	of	this	morning,	since	the	moment	the
ghost	visited	me,	my	facial	muscles	had	had	no	chance	to	relax,	my	face	was
burning	as	if	I	had	spent	a	sleepless	night	riding	on	a	train.	But	now	the	train
seemed	to	be	coming	to	a	stop.	Pimko	was	singing.	I	was	embarrassed	at	having
surrendered	for	so	long	to	a	harmless	little	old	man	to	whom	an	ordinary
schoolgirl	paid	no	attention	whatsoever.	My	face	was	imperceptibly	returning	to
normal,	I	made	myself	more	comfortable	in	my	seat,	and	I	soon	regained	all	my
equilibrium,	and—oh,	joy	of	joys!—I	regained	the	"thirty year old"	I	had	lost.	I
decided	to	leave,	calm	and	collected,	ignoring	all	protests,	but	the	professor
caught	my	hand—he	seemed	quite	different	now.	He	had	aged,	softened,	he
looked	awkward	and	forlorn,	pitiful.
"Joey,"	he	whispered	in	my	ear,	"don't	follow	the	example	of	this	modern	girl,
this	new	species	from	the	postwar	era	of	athletics	and	jazz	bands!	Custom	and
tradition	gone	wild	since	the	war!	No	culture!	No	respect	for	one's	elders!	This
new	generation's	thirst	for	pleasure!	I'm	beginning	to	worry	that	the	atmosphere
here	won't	be	right	for	you.	Promise	that	you	won't	let	this	unbridled	girl
influence	you.	You're	both	alike,"	he	went	on	as	if	in	a	fever,	"you	have	a	lot	in
common,	I	know,	I	know,	actually,	you're	also	a	modern	boy,	and	I	brought	you
to	this	modern	girl	quite	unnecessarily!"
I	looked	at	him	as	if	he'd	gone	crazy.	What?	I	and	my	thirty year old	had
something	in	common	with	this	modern	schoolgirl?	Pimko	seemed	downright
stupid.	And	yet	he	went	on	warning	me	against	the	schoolgirl.
"These	are	new	times!"	he	continued,	"you	young	ones,	you	present day
generation.	You	scorn	your	elders,	and	right	off	the	bat	you're	on	a	first name
basis	with	each	other.	No	respect,	no	reverence	for	the	past,	just	dancing,
kayaking,	America,	impulse	of	the	moment,	
carpe	diem,	
oh,	you	young	ones!"
And	he	went	on,	fast	and	furious,	flattering	my	supposed	youth	and	modernity—
whereas	we	were	the	modern	youth,	whereas	for	us	it's	only	legs,	whereas
whatever	else—meanwhile	Miss	Youngblood	stood	there,	indifferent	to
everything,	picking	at	her	skin,	unaware	of	what	was	brewing	behind	her	back.
I	understood	at	last	what	he	was	up	to—he	wanted,	quite	simply,	to	make	me	fallin	love	with	the	schoolgirl.	His	scheme	was	as	follows:	he	would	draw	me	into
the	girl,	so	to	speak,	in	one	fell	swoop,	hand	me	over—from	one	cute	little	hand
to	another—so	that	I	couldn't	escape.	He	was	inculcating	me	with	an	ideal,	and
he	was	quite	sure	that	once	I	had	acquired	this	paradigm	of	youth,	as	Syphon	and
Kneadus	had	done,	I	would	remain	imprisoned	forever.	The	professor	didn't	care
much	what	kind	of	a	boy	I	would	become,	as	long	as	I	never	again	crept	out	of
boyhood.	If	he	succeeded,	right	then	and	there,	in	making	me	fall	in	love,	and	if
he	inculcated	me	with	the	paradigm	of	the	ideal	modern	boy,	he	would	then	be
able	to	walk	away	in	peace,	to	embrace	his	numerous,	sundry	pursuits,	no	longer
having	to	personally	hold	me	prisoner	to	belittlement.	And	here	was	a	paradox:
Pimko,	who	ostensibly	cherished	his	superiority	above	all	else,	had	now	deigned
to	play	the	humiliating	role	of	an	old fashioned	good	soul	shocked	by	the
modern	generation	of	young	women	in	order	to	lure	me	to	the	schoolgirl.	By
using	his	fuddy duddy,	avuncular	indignation	he	was	uniting	us	against	himself,
and,	by	means	of	old	age	and	antiquated	ways,	he	wanted	to	make	me	fall	in	love
with	youth	and	modernity.	But	Pimko	had	yet	another,	no	less	important,	goal	in
mind.	To	make	me	fall	in	love	was	not	enough—he	wanted	me	to	bond	with	her
in	the	most	immature	way,	it	would	not	have	served	his	designs	for	me	to	simply
fall	in	love	with	her,	no,	he	wanted	me	to	become	infatuated	with	that
particularly	trashy	and	disgusting	young old,	modern antiquated	poetry	born	of
the	union	of	the	prewar	fuddy duddy	and	the	postwar	schoolgirl.	Obviously,	the
prof	wished	to	participate,	however	indirectly,	in	my	enchantment.	Although
utterly	stupid,	it	was	all	ingeniously	conceived,	and	therefore,	imagining	that	I
was	totally	free	of	Pimko,	I	listened	to	his	inept	old uncle	flatteries.	Stupid	me!	I
didn't	know	that	only	stupid	poetry	can	really	entangle	you!
And	out	of	nothing	evolved	a	monstrous	configuration,	a	horridly	poetic	cast	of
characters:	there	under	the	window	the	could not care less,	modern	schoolgirl,
here	on	the	sofa	the	fuddy duddy	professor	bemoaning	postwar	barbarism,	and	I,
between	the	two	of	them,	hemmed	in	by	the	young old	poetry.	God	help	me!
What	about	my	thirty year old?!	I	must	leave,	leave	as	fast	as	I	can!	But	the
world	seemed	to	have	collapsed	and	reorganized	itself	on	new	principles,	the
thirty year old	grew	pale	again	and	out of date,	while	the	modern	one,	there	by
the	window,	grew	ever	more	alluring.	And	the	accursed	Pimko	would	not	let	up.
"Legs,"	he	egged	me	on	to	modernity,	"legs,	I	know	you,	I	know	your	athletics,	I
know	the	ways	of	the	new	Americanized	generation,	you	prefer	legs	to	hands,
legs	are	the	most	important	thing	to	you,	the	calves	of	your	legs!	The	finer,
spiritual	things	in	life	mean	nothing	to	you,	your	calves	are	the	thing.	Athletics!The	calves	of	your	legs,	legs,"	he	went	on	flattering	me,	fast	and	furious,	"it's	the
calves	of	your	legs,	it's	your	calves,	calves,	calves!"
And	just	as	he	had	earlier,	during	their	lunch	hour,	insinuated	the	problem	of
innocence	to	the	formalists—which	had	incensed	them	and	boosted	their
immaturity	a	hundredfold—he	was	now	making	an	issue	of	my	modern	legs.
And	there	I	was,	listening	and	lapping	it	all	up—his	linking	the	calves	of	my	legs
with	those	of	the	new	generation—and	coming	to	feel	the	cruelty	of	youth
toward	old	calves!	And	there	was	also	a	kind	of	leg	camaraderie	with	the
schoolgirl,	plus	a	clandestine,	voluptuous	collusion	of	legs,	plus	leg	patriotism,
plus	the	impudence	of	young	legs,	plus	leg	poetry,	plus	young blooded	pride	in
the	calf	of	the	leg,	and	a	cult	of	the	calf	of	the	leg.	Oh,	what	a	fiendish	body	part!
I	needn't	add	that	all	this	was	happening	quietly	behind	the	schoolgirl's	back
while	she	stood	by	the	window	on	those	contemporary	legs	of	hers,	picking	at
her	skin,	suspecting	nothing.
I	would	have	managed,	nonetheless,	to	break	free	from	those	calves,	but	the	door
suddenly	opened	and	someone	new	appeared	in	the	room;	and	the	entrance	of
this	new	and	unfamiliar	personage	was	my	final	undoing.	It	was	Mrs.
Youngblood,	a	rather	obese	woman,	but	intelligent	and	civic minded,	with	a
keen	and	alert	expression,	also	a	member	of	a	committee	for	rescuing	infants	or
perhaps	for	combating	the	scourge	of	child beggary	in	the	capital.	Pimko	quickly
rose	from	the	sofa,	all	smiles	and	refinement,	as	if	nothing	had	been	going	on—
the	old guard	professor	from	the	prewar	Polish	Galicia.
"Ah,	my	dear	lady!	Bless	your	heart—you're	always	overworked,	always	active,
just	back	from	a	committee	meeting,	no	doubt.	Well,	I've	brought	you	my	Joey,
whom	you	have	so	graciously	accepted	under	your	care,	here	he	is—this	is	Joey,
this	youth	here—Joey,	pay	your	respects	to	Madame,	my	child."
What's	this?	Pimko	had	switched	again	and	resumed	his	indulgent	and
condescending	tone.	Pay	my	respects	to	the	old	woman,	I,	a	juvenile	again?	And
with	all	due	reverence?	I	simply	had	to—the	Youngblood	woman	extended	her
small,	plump	hand,	and	with	fleeting	surprise	glanced	at	my	face	as	it	was
swinging	back	and	forth	between	thirty	and	seventeen.
"How	old	is	the	boy?"	I	heard	her	ask	Pimko	as	she	was	taking	him	aside,	and
the	professor	good naturedly	replied:
"Seventeen,	seventeen,	my	dear	lady,	he	turned	seventeen	in	April,	looks	older
than	his	age,	he	may	be	posturing	a	bit,	pretending	to	be	an	adult,	but	a	heart	of
gold,	hmm,	hmm!""Ah,	posturing,	is	he,"	the	Youngblood	woman	said.
Instead	of	protesting	I	sat	down	again,	I	just	sat	on	the	sofa,	riveted.	The
stupidity	of	this	insinuation	precluded	any	explanation.	And	I	began	to	suffer
terribly,	because	Pimko	pulled	Mrs.	Youngblood	to	the	window,	right	where	the
schoolgirl	was	standing,	and	the	two	of	them	proceeded	to	chat	confidentially,
from	time	to	time	glancing	in	my	direction.	Once	in	a	while	the	trite	prof	would
deliberately,	yet	as	if	by	chance,	project	his	voice.	What	torture!	Because	I	heard
him	unite	me	with	himself	in	relation	to	the	Youngblood	woman—as	he	had
united	me	before	with	the	schoolgirl	against	himself—he	was	now	uniting	me
with	himself.	As	if	it	weren't	enough	to	present	me	as	a	poser	who	was
pretending	to	be	mature	and	blasé,	he	now	emoted	about	my	attachment	to	him,
extolled	the	virtues	of	my	mind	and	heart	("his	only	shortcoming	is	that	he
postures	a	bit—but	it	will	pass"),	and	since	he	talked	with	a	sort	of	senile
tenderness	and	with	the	voice	of	an	old fashioned,	typical	prof,	it	followed	that	I
too	was	old fashioned	and	far	from	modern!	And	he	contrived	a	devilish
situation:	here	am	I,	sitting	on	the	sofa,	having	to	pretend	that	I	haven't	heard
anything,	and	there	is	the	schoolgirl	standing	by	the	window	and	hearing	it	all	or
not,	I	don't	know	which,	and	there	is	Pimko	in	a	corner	shaking	his	head,
coughing	now	and	then,	and	emoting	about	me,	titillating	the	tastes	and	trends	of
the	
avant garde
Mrs.	Engineer.	Oh,	only	a	person	who	fully	appreciates	what	it's
like	to	enter	a	relationship	with	a	stranger	you've	just	met,	what	an	incredibly
risky	process	that	is,	full	of	traps	and	treachery,	can	grasp	my	helplessness	in
relation	to	Pimko's	accord	with	Mrs.	Youngblood.	He	had	led	me	into	the
Youngbloods'	home	under	false	pretenses,	and,	if	that	were	not	enough,	he	was
now	deliberately	raising	his	voice	so	that	I	could	hear	how	falsely	he	had	led	me
there—oh,	how	treacherously	he	had	led	me	into	the	Youngbloods',	and	the
Youngbloods	into	me!
No	wonder	Mrs.	Youngblood	looked	at	me	with	pity	and	exasperation.	Pimko 
dimko's	sickly sweet	prattling	must	have	fed	her	annoyance,	and	besides,	today's
enterprising	engineers'	wives,	fired	up	about	group	action	and	emancipation,
despise	any	artificiality	and	affectation	in	young	people,	and	they	particularly
can't	stand	their	posing	as	adults.	Progressive	as	they	are,	with	all	their	energies
geared	toward	the	future,	they	hold	a	cult	of	youth	more	ardently	than	it	has	ever
been	held	by	anyone	before,	and	nothing	annoys	them	more	than	a	boy	messing
up	his	tender	years	with	posing.	Worse	still,	not	only	do	they	dislike	it,	they
actually	like	their	dislike,	because	it	gives	them	a	sense	of	how	progressive	and
modern	they	themselves	are—they're	always	ready	to	give	their	dislikes	a	freerein.	Mrs.	Engineer	didn't	have	to	be	told	twice—this	fat	woman	could	have
actually	picked	any	other	basis	for	her	relationship	with	me,	and	not	necessarily
predicated	it	on	the	formula	of	modernity	versus	the	old fashioned,	yet	it	was	all
contingent	on	the	first	chord—the	first	chord	we	choose	ourselves,	the	rest	is
merely	a	consequence.	But	Pimko	drew	his	old	pedagogical	bow	across	her
modern	string,	and	she	took	up	the	tune	in	no	time.
"Oh,	I	don't	like	that,"	she	said	with	a	grimace,	"not	one	bit!	A	young	old	man,
blasé	and	probably	not	athletic	either!	I	can't	stand	artificiality.	That's	what	your
outdated	methods	lead	to,	and	what	a	contrast,	my	dear	Professor,	with	my	Zuta
—she's	frank,	easygoing,	natural."
When	I	heard	this	I	lost	any	remaining	confidence	in	the	efficacy	of	protest,	she
wouldn't	have	believed	that	I	was	an	adult	anyway,	because	she	now	fancied
herself	and	her	daughter	in	relation	to	me—	as	an	old fashioned	boy,	brought	up
in	the	old	ways.	And	when	a	mother	fancies	you	with	her	daughter,	that's	it,	you
must	be	just	what	her	daughter	needs.	I	could	have	protested	of	course,	who	says
I	couldn't—I	could	have	risen	to	my	feet	at	any	moment,	walked	up	to	them,	and
—no	matter	how	difficult	it	would	have	been—made	it	abundantly	clear	that	I
was	not	seventeen	but	thirty.	I	could	have yet	I	couldn't	because	I	didn't	want	to,
the	only	thing	I	wanted	was	to	prove	that	I	was	not	an	old fashioned	boy!	That's
all	I	felt	like	doing!	I	was	furious	that	the	schoolgirl	had	heard	Pimko's	prattling,
and	that	she	might	form	a	negative	opinion	of	me.	This	overshadowed	the	issue
of	my	thirty year old,	which	now	had	paled!	This	is	what	burned	me	up	now,
what	stung	me,	hurt	me!	I	sat	on	the	sofa	unable	to	shout	that	he	was	deliberately
lying—so,	I	make	myself	more	comfortable,	stretch	my	legs,	try	to	sit	modernly,
look	relaxed	and	daring,	and	I	mutely	cry	out	that	it's	all	untrue,	because	I'm	not
like	that,	I'm	quite	different,	oh,	legs,	calves,	calves!	I	bend	forward,	I	look
bright	and	natural,	with	my	whole	posture	I	mutely	belie	everything—should	the
schoolgirl	turn	around,	let	her	see	me—but	suddenly	I	hear	the	Youngblood
woman	say	quietly	to	Pimko:
"You're	right,	such	morbid	mannerisms,	just	look	at	him—he's	constantly
striking	poses."
I	could	not	budge.	If	I	changed	my	pose,	it	would	be	obvious	that	I	had	heard
her,	and	she	would	perceive	it	as	yet	another	mannerism,	from	now	on
everything	I	did	would	be	a	mannerism.	Whereupon	the	schoolgirl	turns	from
the	window,	looks	me	over	as	I	sit	there	unable	to	revert	to	something	more
natural,	and	I	see	her	unfriendly	look,	which	makes	it	even	more	difficult	to
change	my	position.	I	also	see	the	girl's	cutting,	young blooded	hostility	wellingup—a	pure,	whiplike	hostility.	And	it	wells	up	to	such	a	degree	that	her	mother
feels	obliged	to	interrupt	her	conversation	and	ask	her	daughter	
en	camarade,
buddy buddy	fashion:
"Why	do	you	look	at	him	like	that,	Zuta?"
The	schoolgirl	does	not	take	her	eyes	off	me,	and,	loyal	to	her	mother—she's	all
loyalty	now,	she's	loyal,	frank,	and	direct—puckers	her	cute	little	lips	and	spits
out:
"He's	been	eavesdropping	all	this	time.	He's	heard	everything."
Oh!	That	was	razor sharp!	...	I	wanted	to	protest,	yet	I	couldn't.	The	Youngblood
woman	lowered	her	voice	and,	savoring	the	girl's	outburst,	said	to	the	professor:
"Nowadays	our	girls	are	exceptionally	sensitive	about	loyalty	and	naturalness—
they're	quite	crazy	on	that	point.	That's	the	new	generation.	The	morality	of	the
Great	War.	We're	all	children	of	the	Great	War,	we	and	our	children."	She	was
obviously	relishing	it	all.	"It's	the	new	generation,"	she	repeated.
"Look	how	her	pretty	little	eyes	darkened,"	the	little	old	man	said	good 
naturedly.
"Pretty	little	eyes?	My	daughter	doesn't	have	'pretty	little	eyes,'	Professor,	she
has	eyes.	We	all	have—eyes.	Zuta,	keep	your	eyes	still."
The	girl	switched	off	her	facial	expression	and	shrugged	her	shoulders	in
repudiation	of	her	mother.	Pimko	was	shocked,	and	remarked	to	Mrs.
Youngblood	as	an	aside:
"Do	you	consider	this	to	be	proper	behavior?	...	In	my	time	a	young	person
wouldn't	dare	shrug	her	shoulders	.	.	.	and	at	her	mother	too!"
But	the	Youngblood	woman	was	ready	for	him,	this	was	up	her	alley,	and	she	let
him	have	it	with	vigor:
"It's	the	era,	Professor,	the	era!	You	don't	know	the	contemporary	generation.
Profound	changes	are	afoot.	A	great	revolution	in	customs	and	traditions,	this	is
a	wind	that	demolishes,	these	are	subterranean	upheavals	and	we're	riding	upon
them.	It's	the	era!	We	have	to	build	anew!	Demolish	everything	that's	old	in	this
country	of	ours,	leave	only	the	new,	demolish	Krakow!"
"Krakow?!"	Pimko	exclaimed.
Whereupon	the	schoolgirl,	who	thus	far	had	been	rather	contemptuously
listening	to	the	dispute	of	the	old	folk,	chose	an	opportune	moment	to	kick	me,
from	the	side,	she	gave	me	a	quick,	concise	kick	in	the	leg,	on	the	sly,	with
impudence	and	hatred,	not	changing	her	bodily	stance	or	facial	expression	one
bit.	Having	kicked	me	she	withdrew	her	leg	and	continued	to	stand	impassively,indifferent	to	what	Pimko	and	Mrs.	Youngblood	were	talking	about.	While	the
mother	was	constantly	at	her	daughter,	the	daughter	was	avoiding	her	mother—
with	an	air	of	superiority,	just	because	she	was	the	younger	of	the	two.
"She	kicked	him!"	the	professor	exclaimed.	"Did	you	see	that,	Mrs.	Youngblood.
We're	just	chatting	here,	while	she's	kicking	him.	What	wildness,	what	audacity,
what	nerve	of	the	unbridled	postwar	generation.	She	kicked	him	with	that	leg	of
hers!"
"Zuta,	keep	your	legs	still!	Don't	worry,	Professor,	it's	nothing,"	she	laughed,	"it
won't	do	your	Joey	any	harm.	Worse	things	happened	at	the	front	during	the
Great	War.	Even	I,	as	a	nurse	in	the	trenches,	have	been	kicked	by	common
soldiers	many	times."
She	lit	a	cigarette.
"In	my	time,"	Pimko	said,	"young	ladies	.	.	.	and	what	would	Norwid	say	to
this?"
"Who's	Norwid?"	the	schoolgirl	asked.
She	did	it	perfectly—she	asked	the	question	with	the	sporty	ignorance	of	the
young	generation,	with	the	amazement	of	the	Era,	matter of factly	and	without
unduly	involving	herself	in	the	question,	and	that's	that,	just	to	give	him	a	taste
of	her	sporty	ignorance.
"She	has	not	heard	of	Norwid!"	he	exclaimed.
The	Youngblood	woman	smiled.
"It's	the	era,	Professor,	the	era!"
The	atmosphere	became	very	pleasant	indeed.	The	schoolgirl	tossed	her
ignorance	of	Norwid	to	Pimko,	Pimko	tossed	his	shock	at	her	ignorance	of
Norwid	back	to	the	schoolgirl,	and	the	mother	laughed	within	the	Era.	I	alone	sat
there,	excluded	from	the	company,	and	I	could	not—I	could	not	speak	up,	nor
comprehend	how	the	roles	had	been	reversed,	how	this	old	relic,	with	legs	a
thousandfold	worse	than	mine,	was	now	in	cahoots	with	the	modern	one	against
me,	and	how	I	had	become	a	counterpoint	to	their	melody.	Oh,	Pimko,	you	devil
incarnate!	As	I	sat	there	silently,	kicked,	I	must	have	looked	angry	and	sullen,
because	Pimko	said	to	me	in	a	kindly	voice:
"Why	are	you	so	quiet,	Joey?	When	in	company,	one	ought	to	say	something...
are	you	cross	with	Miss	Zuta	by	any	chance?"
"Ha,	he's	miffed!"	the	sportsgirl	jeered.
"Zuta,	apologize	to	the	young	man,"	Mrs.	Engineer	said	forcefully.	"You've
offended	him,	but	you	young	man,	don't	be	cross	with	my	daughter,	youshouldn't	be	so	touchy.	Zuta	will	apologize,	of	course,	but	on	the	other	hand
we're	posturing	a	bit,	aren't	we,	and	that's	the	truth.	Be	more	natural,	look	lively,
just	watch	me	and	Zuta—well,	we'll	break	this	young	man	of	his	habits,	rest
assured,	Professor.	We'll	teach	him	a	lesson."
"I	think	that	in	this	respect	his	stay	here	will	do	him	good.	Well,	Joey,	uncloud
your	little	brow."
And	so	each	one	of	these	pronouncements	finally	and—it	seemed—	irrevocably
determined	the	order	of	things,	defined	and	settled	them.	Pimko	and	Mrs.
Youngblood	briefly	discussed	the	financial	arrangements,	then	Pimko	kissed	me
on	the	forehead.
"Good	luck,	my	boy,	goodbye,	Joey.	Be	good	now,	don't	cry,	don't	cry,	I'll	visit
you	here	every	Sunday,	and	at	school	I	won't	let	you	out	of	my	sight	either.
Greetings,	my	dear	lady,	goodbye,	goodbye,	Miss	Zuta,	shame,	you	be	good	to
Joey!"
He	left,	but	one	could	still	hear	him	from	the	stairs,	coughing	now	and	then,
clearing	his	throat:	"Ough,	ough,	hem,	hem,	ough,	ough!	Eh,	eh,	eh!"	I	set	off	to
protest	and	explain.	But	Mrs.	Youngblood	steered	me	to	a	small,	modern,
cheerless	cubbyhole	just	off	the	parlor,	the	parlor	that	(as	it	turned	out)	also
served	as	Miss	Youngblood's	room.
"Here	you	are,"	she	said,	"your	room.	The	bathroom	is	next	door.	Breakfast	is	at
seven.	Your	things	are	here—the	maid	has	brought	them	in."
And	before	I	had	a	chance	to	stammer	"thank	you,"	she	was	gone	to	her
committee	meeting	to	combat	the	un European	scourge	of	child beggary	in	the
capital.	I	was	left	all	alone.	I	sat	on	a	chair.	Everything	was	quiet.	There	was
buzzing	in	my	head.	I	sat	in	these	new	circumstances,	in	my	new	room.	After
being	with	so	many	people	since	this	morning,	I	suddenly	found	myself	in	total
isolation,	only	the	schoolgirl	was	moving	about	and	puttering	in	the	parlor	next
door.	No,	no,	this	was	not	solitude—this	was	solitude	with	a	schoolgirl.7	Love
And	again	I	wanted	to	break	out	in	protests	and	explanations.	I	had	to	do
something.	I	could	not	let	myself	become	entrenched	in	this	situation	forever.
Any	delay	threatened	to	make	it	permanent.	Rather	than	sorting	and	folding	my
things,	which	the	maid	had	brought	in	on	Pimko's	command,	I	sat	stiffly	in	my
chair.
"Now,"	I	told	myself,	"now	is	my	only	chance	to	explain	myself,	to	clarify
things,	to	make	myself	understood.	Pimko	has	gone.	Mrs.	Youngblood	is	out.
The	schoolgirl	is	here	alone.	Don't	delay,	because	time	weighs	heavily	on
everything	and	solidifies	it,	go	now,	go	at	once,	explain	everything,	show	Zuta
your	true	colors,	because	tomorrow	will	be	too	late.	Show	her,	show	yourself	to
her,"—oh,	how	desperately	I	wanted	to	do	just	that,	I	was	seized	by	a	desire	to
show	her.	All	well	and	good,	but	show	her—what?	That	I'm	an	adult,	a	thirty 
year old?	No,	no,	forever	no,	at	this	moment	I	had	no	wish	to	make	my	way	out
of	youth	and	admit	that	I	was	a	thirty year old;	my	world	had	collapsed,	I	no
longer	saw	the	world	except	as	a	marvelous	world	through	the	eyes	of	this
modern	schoolgirl—sports,	agility,	arrogance,	legs,	calves	of	legs,	wantonness,
dancing,	boating,	kayaking—these	were	the	new	pillars	of	my	reality!	Yes,	yes—
I	wanted	to	appear	modern!	The	ghost	that	had	visited	me	this	morning,	Syphon,
Kneadus,	Pimko,	the	duel—I	pushed	aside	everything	that	had	happened—I	was
only	concerned	with	the	schoolgirl's	thoughts	about	me,	whether	she	had
believed	Pimko	that	I	wasn't	modern,	and	just	a	poser;	all	I	had	to	do	was	go	to
her	right	now,	to	present	myself	as	modern	and	unaffected,	to	make	her	realize
that	Pimko	had	lied	about	me,	that	in	reality	I	was	quite	different,	that	I	was	like
her,	her	contemporary	in	age	and	era,	that	the	calves	of	our	legs	made	us	kith	and
kin	...
To	appear	before	her,	yes—but	under	what	pretext?	How	was	I	to	explain
anything	when	I	hardly	knew	her—a	stranger	to	me	in	social	terms—even
though,	in	her	mind,	I	was	already	at	her	beck	and	call?	As	far	as	I	was
concerned	reaching	her	at	a	deeper	level	of	reality	would	be	extremely	difficult
—I	could	reach	her	only	through	trifling	details,	I	could	knock	on	her	door	and
merely	ask	when	supper	is	served.	The	kick	she	had	dealt	me	made	the	task	no
easier—it	was	a	parenthetical	kick,	delivered	without	the	participation	of	her
face,	and	in	fact	I	felt	deprived	of	a	face	that	would	go	with	it.	I	sat	on	the	chair
like	a	caged	animal,	like	a	horse	on	a	lead	held	at	a	distance	with	a	whip,	and	I
rubbed	my	hands—how	could	I,	under	what	pretext	could	I	take	things	in	handwith	the	Youngblood	girl	and	within	myself?
Suddenly	the	telephone	rang,	and	I	heard	the	schoolgirl's	footsteps.
I	stood	up,	carefully	opened	the	door	to	the	hallway,	and	looked	around—no	one
was	there,	the	house	seemed	empty,	it	was	twilight,	but	I	could	hear	her	making
plans	with	her	girlfriend	on	the	phone,	for	seven	at	the	coffee	shop,	she	would	be
there,	also	Leo	and	Babe	(they	had	their	nicknames,	their	own	expressions	and
appellations).	"You'll	be	there,	seven	sharp,	sure,	yeah,	no,	fine,	my	leg	hurts,
I've	pulled	a	ligament,	he's	an	idiot,	a	photo,	oh,	be	sure	to	come,	yeah,	you'll
come,	I'll	be	there,	it's	all	a	lark,	for	sure."	These	words,	spoken	under	her	breath
by	a	modern	one	to	another	modern	one,	into	the	receiver	and	unaware	of
anyone	standing	by,	moved	me	deeply.	"This	is	their	own	language,"	I	thought	to
myself,	"their	own	modern	language!"	It	then	occurred	to	me	that—immobilized
as	she	was	by	the	telephone,	her	lips	busy	talking,	her	eyes	roaming	around—the
girl	would	be	more	accessible	and	receptive	to	my	designs.	I	could	appear	before
her	without	any	explanations,	just	show	up—without	any	comments.
I	quickly	straightened	my	collar	and	tie,	licked	my	hair	flat	to	show	off	my	part,
because	I	knew	that	in	these	circumstances	a	straight	line	on	the	side	of	one's
head	was	not	devoid	of	meaning.	The	line,	God	knows	why,	was	something
modern.	As	I	crossed	the	dining	room	I	picked	up	a	toothpick	from	the	table,	and
I	appeared	before	her	(the	phone	was	in	an	anteroom),	emerging	nonchalantly	on
the	threshold,	and,	leaning	with	my	shoulder	against	the	door,	I	stood	there.	I
quietly	bent	forward	with	my	entire	being,	still	chewing	on	the	toothpick.	A
modern	toothpick.	Don't	think	that	it	was	easy	to	stand	there,	a	toothpick	in	my
mouth	pretending	that	I	was	at	ease	while	everything	within	me	was	still
paralyzed,	to	be	aggressive	while	inwardly	remaining	deathly	passive.
In	the	meantime	Miss	Youngblood	was	talking	to	her	girlfriend.
"No,	not	necessarily,	hell,	sure,	go	with	her,	no,	not	with	him,	the	photo,	what
fun,	I'm	sorry—wait	a	minute."
She	put	down	the	receiver	and	asked	me:
"Do	you	want	to	make	a	phone	call?"
She	said	this	in	a	sociable,	cool	tone,	quite	as	if	it	wasn't	me	she	had	kicked.	I
shook	my	head.	I	wanted	her	to	realize	that	I	was	here	for	no	other	reason	than:
"it's	just	you	and	me,	I	have	the	right	to	stand	in	the	door	while	you're	making	a
phone	call,	I'm	your	comrade	in	modernity	and	your	contemporary,	and,	do
understand,	Miss	Youngblood,	that	any	explanations	between	us	are	superfluous,
that	I	can	join	you,	standing	on	no	ceremony,	it's	as	simple	as	that."	I	was	riskinga	great	deal	because,	had	she	asked	for	any	explanations,	I	would	have	been	hard
pressed	to	explain	anything,	and	this	horribly	artificial	situation	would	have
immediately	forced	me	to	retreat.	But	what	if	she	were	to	receive	and	accept	me,
to	silently	agree	with	me?—	a	naturalness	I	hardly	dared	dream	of!	And	then	I'd
be	one	with	her,	and	truly	modern.	"Oh,	Kneadus,	Kneadus,"	I	anxiously	thought
to	myself	as	I	remembered	his	horribly	contorted	face	after	his	initial	smiles.	It's
easier	with	a	woman	though,	I	must	admit.	The	otherness	of	our	bodies	created
better	possibilities.
But	the	Youngblood	girl,	the	receiver	to	her	ear,	did	not	look	at	me,	she	talked
for	a	long	time	(time	began	to	threaten	me	again	and	weigh	heavily),	then	finally
she	said:
"Fine,	at	seven	sharp,	for	sure,	the	movies,	bye,"	and	hung	up.
She	rose	and	went	to	her	room.	I	took	the	toothpick	out	of	my	mouth	and	went	to
my	room.	There	was	a	little	stool	to	one	side	near	a	closet	by	the	wall,	not	for
sitting,	but	rather	to	be	used	as	a	night	table—I	sat	stiffly	on	this	stool	and
rubbed	my	hands.	She	had	ignored	me—she	didn't	even	jeer	at	me.	Well	and
good,	but	having	started	something,	I	couldn't	just	let	it	go,	I	had	to	resolve	it
somehow	while	Mrs.	Youngblood	was	still	out	of	the	house,	"try	again,"	I
thought	to	myself,	"because	after	your	hapless	performance	she	will	truly,	once
and	for	all,	take	you	for	a	poser,	in	any	case	your	pose	seems	to	be	solidifying,
intensifying	by	the	minute,	why	are	you	sitting	here	to	one	side,	by	the	wall,	why
are	you	rubbing	your	hands?	Surely,	rubbing	your	hands	in	your	room,	while
sitting	on	this	stool,	is	the	antithesis	of	modernity,	it's	so	old fashioned.	O	God!"
I	calmed	down	and	listened	to	what	was	happening	on	the	other	side	of	the	wall.
The	Youngblood	girl	moved	about	in	her	room	like	all	girls	do	when	they're	at
home.	And	while	moving,	she	was	bound	to,	at	the	same	time,	settle	herself
more	and	more	firmly	in	her	opinion	of	me	as	a	poser.	This	was	terrible—to	feel
pushed	out,	and	to	just	sit	while	she	was	thinking	God	knows	what	about	me—
but	how	was	I	to	accost	her,	to	accost	her	a	second	time,	what	was	I	supposed	to
do?	I	had	no	more	pretexts—and	even	if	I	had	any	I	couldn't	use	them,	because
the	whole	issue	had	become	too	intimate	for	mere	pretexts.
Meanwhile,	dusk	was	falling,	and	solitude—that	false	solitude	when	one	is	alone
and	yet	not	alone	in	a	painful	spiritual	relationship	with	another	human	being
who	is	on	the	other	side	of	the	wall,	yet	alone	enough	that	things	like	rubbing
one's	hands,	fingers	cramping	and	similar	other	symptoms,	seem	ridiculous—
thus	the	dusk	and	that	false	solitude	made	my	head	spin,	it	blinded	me	andremoved	all	vestiges	of	reality,	plunging	me	into	the	night.	Oh,	how	night	has	a
way	of	tearing	into	our	day!	Alone	in	my	room,	sitting	on	the	little	stool,	all	too
aimless	in	my	activity,	I	couldn't	bear	it	any	longer.	States	which	we	live	through
and	share	openly	with	someone	else	are	not	a	threat	but,	without	a	partner	they
become	unbearable.	Solitude	forces	one	outward.	Therefore,	after	so	much
torture,	I	opened	the	door	again	and,	emerging	from	my	solitude	blind	as	a	bat,
appeared	on	the	threshold.	As	I	stood	there	I	realized	once	more	that	I	didn't
know	how	to	grapple	with	her,	how	to,	so	to	speak,	lay	hands	on	her—	she
continued	to	be	totally	separate	and	closed	off—what	a	hellish	thing,	that	precise
and	clear cut	contour	of	the	human	form,	that	cold	demarcation	line—the	form!
Bending	over,	her	foot	resting	on	a	stool,	she	was	polishing	her	shoe	with	a	soft
suede	cloth.	There	was	something	classical	about	it,	and	it	seemed	to	me	that	the
girl	was	not	so	much	interested	in	the	shine	of	her	shoe	as	in	trying,	with	the	use
of	her	leg	and	her	calf,	to	secretly	perfect	her	type	and	to	keep	up	that	solid,
modern	style.	This	encouraged	me	because	I	thought	that	the	modern	one,	caught
in	the	act	with	her	leg,	would	be	more	gracious	and	less	formal.	I	went	toward
her—I	stood	near	her,	no	more	than	one	or	two	steps	away,	and,	not	looking	at
her,	drawing	back	my	gaze,	I	silently	placed	myself	at	her	disposal—to	this	day	I
remember	perfectly—I	walk	toward	her,	I	stand	a	step	away,	right	on	the	border
of	her	space,	I	withdraw	all	my	senses	so	that	I	can	come	even	closer,	and	I	wait.
What	for?	To	avoid	surprising	her.	This	time	no	toothpick,	no	particular	pose.
Let	her	accept	me	or	reject	me,	I	tried	to	be	totally	passive,	neutral.
She	removed	her	leg	from	the	stool	and	straightened	herself	up	...
"You	have	some	.	.	.	business	with	me?"	she	asked	hesitantly,	looking	askance,
like	a	human	being	who	is	being	crowded	by	another	human	being	for	no	good
reason;	and	now	that	she	stood	up,	the	tension	between	us	rose.	I	sensed	that	she
would	have	preferred	to	move	away.	But	she	couldn't	because	I	stood	too	close
to	her.
Did	I	have	any	business	with	her?
"No,"	I	answered	softly.
She	let	her	arms	drop	by	her	side.	She	frowned.
"You're	posing	then?"	she	said	defensively,	just	in	case.
"No,"	I	persisted,	whispering,	"no."
There	was	a	small	table	next	to	me.	Further	on—a	radiator.	A	brush	and	a
penknife	lay	on	the	table.	Dusk	was	falling—the	evanescent	light	between	night
and	day	gradually	blurred	all	boundaries,	as	well	as	that	ominous	demarcationline	between	us,	and,	thus	shrouded	in	the	veil	of	dusk,	I	felt	sincere,	sincere	to
my	utmost,	eager	and	ready	for	the	schoolgirl.
I	wasn't	faking.	If	she	had	realized	that	I	wasn't	faking	now,	it	would	have	meant
that	it	was	my	affected	behavior	in	Pimko's	presence	that	was	the	fake.	Why	did
I	think	that	a	young	woman	isn't	supposed	to	refuse	a	man	who	insists	on	her
consent?	Did	I	think	that	the	schoolgirl	would,	under	the	cover	of	darkness,
succumb	to	the	temptation	of	considering	me	useful?	And	why	not	opt	for	my
being	friendly	and	useful?	Why	wouldn't	she	rather	host	an	American style
colleague	than	an	old fashioned,	soured,	and	disgruntled	faker?	Why	not	play
her	melody	upon	me	now,	at	this	hour	of	dusk—I'm	here,	I'm	offering	myself—
oh,	play,	play	your	melody	upon	me,	that	modern	melody	that	everyone	is
humming	in	cafés,	on	beaches,	and	in	dance	halls,	the	pure	melody	of	universal
youth	dressed	in	tennis	pants.	Strum	upon	me	the	modernity	of	those	tennis
pants.	Won't	you?
Surprised	by	my	being	so	close	to	her,	the	Youngblood	girl	sat	on	the	table,	and,
with	a	kind	of	bodily	whimsy	she	pressed	her	hands	against	the	edge—her	face,
vacillating	between	surprise	and	amusement,	emerged	from	the	dusk—and	I
thought	that	she	had	seated	herself	as	if	to	play...	That's	how	American	girls	are
wont	to	sit	and	dangle	their	legs	over	the	side	of	a	boat.	And	the	mere	fact	that
she	sat	down	made	me	tingle	all	over,	her	behavior	indicated	at	least	a	tacit
agreement	to	prolong	the	situation.	She	seemed	to	have	settled	herself	for	the
duration,	come	what	may.	My	heart	pounding,	I	watched	her	set	in	motion	some
of	her	charms.	She	cocked	her	cute	little	head—she	impatiently	wiggled	her	little
leg—she	pouted	her	little	mouth—while	her	large	eyes,	her	modern girl	eyes,
turned	cautiously	aside,	toward	the	dining	room,	to	check	whether	the
housemaid	was	there.	Because	what	would	the	housemaid	say	if	she	saw	us,
almost	total	strangers,	in	this	odd	configuration?	Would	she	think	us	too
affected?	Or	too	natural?
But	this	is	the	kind	of	risk	that	girls	like	to	take,	those	girls	of	the	dusky	hour
who	show	what	they	can	do	only	under	the	cloak	of	dusk.	I	sensed	that	I	had
conquered	the	schoolgirl	with	affectation's	wild	naturalness.	I	stuck	my	hands
into	my	jacket	pockets.	Straining	toward	her,	taking	in	her	every	breath,	I	was
totally	with	her,	quietly	yet	fervently,	with	all	my	might—I	was	so	amiable,	oh,
so	amiable	...	Time	was	now	on	my	side.	Every	second,	while	intensifying	the
affectation,	intensified	the	naturalness.	I	expected	her	to	suddenly	say	something
to	me,	as	if	we	had	known	each	other	for	ages,	something	about	her	leg,	that	it
was	hurting	her	because	she	had	pulled	a	ligament:"My	leg	hurts,	I've	pulled	a	ligament.	.	.	You	drink	whisky,	don't	you,	Annabelle
..."
She	was	just	about	to	say	it,	her	lips	began	to	move—when	suddenly	she	came
up	with	something	completely	different,	almost	in	spite	of	herself—and	in	a
formal	tone	she	asked:
"What	can	I	do	for	you?"
I	took	a	step	back	while	she—tickled	pink	by	what	she	had	just	said,	yet	losing
none	of	the	dash	and	style	of	a	young,	modern	girl	sitting	on	a	table	and	dangling
her	legs,	indeed,	looking	even	more	stylish—she	repeated	with	emphasis,	her
interest	was	cold	and	formal:
"What	can	I	do	for	you?"
And,	sensing	that	those	words	detracted	nothing	from	her	own	self—on	the
contrary,	they	imparted	to	her	a	sharpness,	an	unsentimental	matter of factness,
even	added	to	the	general	effect—she	looked	at	me	as	if	I	were	a	madman	and
asked	again:
"What	can	I	do	for	you?"
I	turned	around	and	walked	away,	but	my	shoulders,	in	their	retreat,	must	have
annoyed	her	even	more,	because	from	behind	the	door	I	heard	her	say:
"What	a	clown!"
Rebuffed,	shoved	away,	I	sat	on	my	little	stool	by	the	wall,	totally	exhausted.
"It's	all	over,"	I	whispered,	"she's	ruined	it	all.	But	why?	Something	must	have
cut	her	to	the	quick—she'd	rather	ride	roughshod	over	me	than	ride	with	me.
Hello,	my	little	stool,	here	by	the	wall,	but	it's	high	time	to	unpack	my	things,
my	suitcase	is	still	in	the	center	of	the	room,	there	are	no	towels."
I	meekly	sat	on	the	stool,	it	was	almost	dark,	I	began	folding	my	underwear	and
placing	it	in	the	drawer—I	must	do	it	now,	school	is	tomorrow—I	didn't	turn	on
the	light,	it	wasn't	worth	it	really,	just	for	me.	I	felt	wretched	and	pitiful	but	that
was	all	right,	I	only	wished	to	move	no	more,	to	sit	down	and	to	keep	sitting,	to
desire	nothing,	nothing	ever.
But	after	a	few	minutes	of	sitting	it	became	obvious	that,	regardless	of	all	the
exhaustion	and	wretchedness,	I	must	become	active	again.	"Is	there	no	rest?"	I
wondered.	Now,	for	the	third	time,	I'd	have	to	go	into	her	room	and	be	the	clown
again	so	that	she	would	know	that	I	had	been	clowning	all	along,	and	that	it	was
I	who	was	making	fun	of	her	and	not	the	other	way	around.	
Tout	est	perdu	sauf
l'honeur—
as	Francis	the	First	had	said.	Therefore,	regardless	of	my
wretchedness	and	fatigue,	I	got	up	and	began	to	get	ready.	My	preparations	tooka	rather	long	time.	Finally	I	half opened	the	door,	first	inserting	into	her	room
only	my	head.	What	blinding	intensity	of	light!—she	had	lit	her	lamp.	I	closed
my	eyes.	An	impatient	remark	reached	my	ears:
"Please	don't	come	in	without	knocking."
Moving	my	head	in	the	gap	of	the	door,	my	eyes	still	closed,	I	replied:
"Your	obedient	servant,	at	your	feet."
I	opened	the	door	fully	and	now	entered	
in	toto,	
ambling	in,	waggishly,	oh,	the
ambling	of	a	human	wretch!	Remembering	the	old	maxim	that	anger	detracts
from	beauty,	I	made	up	my	mind	to	make	her	mad.	I	hoped	she'd	get	exasperated
while	I,	maintaining	composure	behind	a	clown's	mask,	would	then	have	the
upper	hand.	She	exclaimed:
"Your	manners	are	terrible!"
The	words,	coming	as	they	did	from	those	modern	lips,	surprised	me,	especially
since	they	rang	true—as	if	good	manners	were	the	ultimate	court	of	appeal	of	the
wild	and	unruly	postwar	schoolgirls.	Those	modern	ones	were	masters	at
juggling	in	turn	good	and	bad	manners.	I	felt	like	a	yokel.	It	was	too	late	to
retreat—the	world	goes	on	existing	solely	because	it	is	always	too	late	to	retreat.
I	bowed	and	replied:
"At	your	feet,	your	ladyship."
She	rose	and	turned	toward	the	door.	What	disaster!	If	she	goes	out	and	leaves
me,	together	with	my	crassness—all	will	be	lost!	I	lunged	forward	and	blocked
her	way.	She	stopped.
"What	do	you	want?"
She	looked	worried.
And	I,	imprisoned	be	the	consequence	of	my	movement	and	unable	to	retreat,
began	bearing	down	on	her.	And	onto	her,	like	a	madman,	a	clown,	a	poser,	an
ape,	onto	this	young	miss,	I,	a	Baroque	formalist	and	a	prankster,	with	dumb
arrogance—she	retreats	behind	the	table—I	amble	toward	her,	like	an	ape,	and
with	my	finger	pointing	which	way	she's	supposed	to	go,	I	push	on	toward	her,
like	a	drunkard,	like	a	fiendish	cad,	a	bandit—she's	at	the	wall,	I	follow	her.	But,
damn	it!—while	I'm	on	her	heels,	hideously,	like	a	monster,	all	a goggle,	I	see
that—confronted	with	this	madman	she	loses	none	of	her	beauty—while	I
become	inhuman,	she—a	slight	figure	by	the	wall,	bent	over,	pale,	her	hands	by
her	side,	her	arms	slightly	bent	at	the	elbows,	her	pupils	dilated,	panting	as	if	I
had	thrown	her	against	the	wall—she's	extremely	quiet,	tense	with	danger,
hostile,	incredibly	beautiful—like	a	film	star—modern,	poetic,	artistic,	and	fear,instead	of	marring	her	beauty,	adorns	her	even	more!	One	moment	more.	I'm
getting	closer,	and	surely	some	resolution	needs	now	to	follow—it	passes
through	my	mind	that	this	is	the	end,	that	I	must	catch	her	by	that	little	face	of
hers—I	am	in	love,	in	love!	.	.	.	when	suddenly	there's	screaming	in	the	hallway.
It's	Kneadus	attacking	the	housemaid.	We	didn't	hear	the	doorbell	ring.	He	had
come	to	visit	me	in	my	new	quarters	and,	finding	himself	alone	with	the
housemaid	in	the	hallway,	wanted	to	force	himself	on	her.
Since	his	duel	with	Syphon,	Kneadus	could	not	be	rid	of	his	horrible	face 
pulling,	he	was	so	hellishly	entangled	that	he	couldn't	contain	his	monstrous
behavior.	When	he	saw	the	housemaid	he	couldn't	help	behaving	in	the	most
coarse	and	brutal	way	possible.	The	girl	raised	hell.	Kneadus	kicked	her	in	the
belly	and	walked	into	the	room,	a	half bottle	of	vodka	under	his	arm.
"Ah,	so	you're	here!"	he	yelled.	"Hi,	Joey,	old	pal!	I'm	here	to	pay	you	a	visit.
I've	brought	some	vodka	and	sausage!	Ho,	ho,	ho,	that's	quite	a	mug	you've	got
on!	But	don't	worry,	mine's	no	better!
Let	a	mug	hit	a	mug	in	the	mug!	That's	our	fate!	That's	our	fate!	Hit	your	mug	in
the	teeth,	Lest	you	hang	from	a	tree!
What	a	mess—did	that	Syphon	make	you	look	like	this?!	Hey,	who's	that	slip	by
the	wall?	Greetings,	ma'am!"	"I've	fallen	in	love,	Kneadus,	I've	fallen	in	love	..."
To	which	Kneadus	replied	with	the	wisdom	of	a	drunkard:	"So	that's	why	you've
got	this	mug	for	a	face?	That's	my	buddy,	Joey!	Well,	that's	quite	a	mug	your
beloved	has	stuck	on	you.	If	you	could	only	see	yourself.	But	never	mind,	never
mind,	mine's	quite	a	sight	too.	That's	my	buddy!	But	let's	go,	let's	go,	don't	even
bother	with	her,	show	me	your	'suite,'	bring	some	bread	so	we	can	have	it	with
the	sausage—I've	brought	a	bottle	to	drown	our	sorrows!	Stop	fretting,	Joey!
Let's	have	a	drink,	buddy,	let's	shoot	the	breeze,	shoot	our	mugs	off	about
whatever,	it'll	do	us	good!	This	is	my	third	bottle	today.	It'll	do	us	good.
Greetings,	your	ladyship	.	.	.	
bon	jour...	au	revoir...	
Good	evening!	
Allons,
allons!"
Once	again	I	turned	to	the	modern	one.	I	wanted	to	say	something,	to	explain—
to	say	the	one	word	that	would	save	me—but	there	was	no	such	word,	then
Kneadus	caught	me	by	the	arm	and	we	headed	toward	my	room,	reeling,	drunk
not	with	alcohol	but	with	those	mugs	of	ours.	I	burst	into	tears	and	told	him
everything,	absolutely	everything	about	the	schoolgirl.	He	heard	me	out	tenderly,
like	a	father,	and	then	intoned:
Hey	the	mug	On	a	tree	Like	a	chickadee!Drink,	drink	up,	why	aren't	you	drinking?	Wet	your	whistle!	Kiss	that	little
bottle,	give	it	a	smooch!"
His	face	looked	terrible,	horribly	coarse	and	vulgar,	and	he	ate	the	sausage	from
a	greasy	piece	of	paper,	shoving	it	into	his	gaping	mouth.
"Kneadus,"	I	exclaimed,	"I	want	to	be	free!	Free!"
"Free	of	your	mug?	Shit."
"No,	free	of	the	schoolgirl!	After	all,	Kneadus,	I'm	thirty	years	old,	not	a	day
younger!	Thirty!"
He	looked	at	me	in	surprise,	my	words	must	have	conveyed	real	pain.	But	then
he	burst	out	laughing.
"Hey,	what	drivel!	Thirty	years	old!	What	an	idiot,	you're	off	your	rocker,	what	a
moron	(and	he	used	a	few	expressions	that	I	won't	repeat).	Thirty!	Hey,	know
what?"	he	took	another	swig	from	the	bottle	and	spat,	"I	know	this	doll	of	yours
from	somewhere.	I	know	her	by	sight.	Kopyrda's	after	her."
"Who's	after	her?"
"Kopyrda.	The	one	from	our	class.	He's	taken	a	fancy	to	her	because	he's	also—
modern.	Tell	you	what,	if	she's	truly	modern	it's	a	bummer,	you	won't	get
anywhere	with	her!	This	modern	one	will	take	up	only	with	other	modern	ones,
only	with	her	own	kind.	Well,	well,	if	this	modern	one	stuck	this	mug	on	you,
you	won't	get	back	on	your	feet	that	easily.	That's	worse	than	Syphon.	Never
mind,	old	boy,	everyone	has	some	kind	of	an	ideal	that's	stuck	to	his	person,	like
a	block	of	wood	on	Ash	Wednesday
{7}
	Drink	up,	drink	up,	have	a	swig!	Do	you
think	I'm	free?	I've	turned	my	mug	into	a	dishrag,	and	the	farmhand	still	plagues
me."
"But	you've	raped	Syphon,	haven't	you?"
"So	what?	I've	raped	him,	but	my	mug	is	still	the	same.	Look,"	he	said	in
disbelief,	"we're	quite	a	pair,	me	with	my	farmhand	and	you	with	your
schoolgirl.	Have	another	swig	of	vodka!	Hey,	hey,	oh,	the	farmhand,"	he
suddenly	waxed	sentimental,	"hey,	hey,	the	farmhand!	Joey,	oh,	how	I	want	to
run	to	my	farmhand.	Hey ho	to	the	meadows,	hey ho	to	the	fields,	oh,	let's	run
away,	let's	run,"	he	kept	muttering,	"to	the	farmhand...	to	the	farmhand	..."
But	I	was	not	in	the	least	concerned	with	his	farmhand.	The	modern	one	was	the
only	one	on	my	mind!	All	at	once	I	was	seized	with	jealousy—oh,	so	Kopyrda	is
after	her!	But	if	he's	"after	her,"	and	not	"with	her,"	it	may	mean	that	they	don't
even	know	each	other	...	I	did	not	dare	ask.	And	so	we	sat	with	our	mugs,	on	two
separate	tracks,	each	with	his	own	thoughts,	taking	a	swig	from	the	bottle	nowand	then.	Kneadus	rose	unsteadily.
"I	have	to	go,"	he	said	under	his	breath,	"the	old	woman	might	come	back	any
minute.	I'll	go	through	the	kitchen,"	he	mumbled.	"I'll	look	in	on	the	housemaid.
You've	got	yourself	quite	a	housemaid	there,	not	bad,	not	bad	at	all...	Still,	it's
not	the	same	as	a	farmhand,	but	at	least	she's	lower	class.	Maybe	she	has	a
farmhand	for	a	brother.	Ech,	old	boy—a	farmhand...	a	farmhand..."
He	left.	And	I	was	left	with	the	schoolgirl.	The	moon	cast	a	pale	light	on	flecks
of	dust	that	filled	the	air	in	great	multitudes,	swaying	to	and	fro.8	Fruit	Compote
And	next	morning	there's	school	again,	and	Syphon,	Kneadus,	Hopek,	Mizdral,
Galkiewicz	and	
accusativus	cum	infinitivo,	
Ashface,	bards,	and	the	daily	general
impotence—	boring,	boring,	boring!	And	the	same	grind	again!	And	the	bard
bards	again,	the	teacher—to	earn	his	keep—babbles	about	the	bard,	the	students
suffer	prostrate	under	their	desks,	the	toe	in	one's	shoe	keeps	twirling	like	a	top,
and	Peter	Piper	picked	a	peck	of	pickled	peppers,	and	Peter	Piper	pickled	a	peck
of	peppers,	and	Bard	the	Piper	picked	a	peck	of	pickled	peppers,	boring,	boring!
And	again	boredom	oppresses	us,	and	under	the	pressure	of	the	boredom,	the
bard,	and	the	teacher,	that	which	is	real	slowly	turns	into	a	world	of	ideals,	oh,
let	me	dream,	let	me—no	one	knows	anymore	what	is	real	and	what	doesn't	even
exist,	what	is	truth	and	what	is	illusion,	what	one	feels	or	doesn't	feel,	what	is
natural	behavior	and	what	is	affectation	or	make believe,	and,	what	should	b	e
becomes	confused	with	what	inexorably	i	s,	one	disqualifying	the	other,	one
depriving	the	other	of	all	
raison	d'etre,	
oh,	what	a	great	schooling	in	unreality!
And	so	I	too	dreamt	about	my	ideal,	for	live	solid	hours	a	day,	my	mug
expanding	in	this	emptiness	like	a	balloon,	without	impediment—because,	in
this	unreal,	imaginary	world,	there	was	nothing	that	could	return	it	to	normal.	I
too	had	my	unreality—the	modern	schoolgirl.	I	was	in	love.	I	had	my	daydream,
the	doleful	lover	and	aspirant	that	I	was.	After	my	unsuccessful	attempts	to	win
my	beloved—such	as	by	jeering	at	her—a	great	sorrow	came	over	me,	I	knew	all
was	lost.
Like	rosary	beads,	a	string	of	monotonous	days	ensued.	I	was	trapped.	What	can
I	say	about	those	days—all	identical	images	of	one	another?	In	the	morning	I
went	to	school,	and	after	school	I	returned	to	the	Youngbloods'	for	dinner.	I	was
no	longer	interested	in	running	away,	nor	in	explaining	anything,	nor	in
protesting—on	the	contrary,	I	took	pleasure	in	becoming	a	schoolboy	because,	as
a	schoolboy,	I	would,	after	all,	be	closer	to	the	schoolgirl	than	as	an	independent
young	man.	Hey,	hey!	I	almost	forgot	about	my	erstwhile	"thirty year old."	The
teachers	grew	to	like	me,	Principal	Piôrkowski	patted	my	pupa,	and	during
ideological	debates	I	too	shouted,	my	cheeks	flushed:	"Modernity!	Hooray	for
the	modern	boy!	Hooray	for	the	modern	girl!"	Which	made	Kopyrda	laugh.
Remember	Kopyrda—the	one	and	only	modern	boy	in	the	entire	school?	I
wanted	to	be	in	league	with	him,	I	tried	to	befriend	him	and	to	extract	from	him
the	secret	of	his	relationship	with	the	Youngblood	girl—but	he	brushed	me	off,
treating	me	with	even	greater	disdain	than	he	treated	the	others,	as	if	sensing	thatI	had	been	rebuffed	by	his	sister in kind,	the	modern	schoolgirl.	On	the	whole,
the	ruthless ness	with	which	the	students	persecuted	any	species	of	youth	other
than	their	own	was	amazing,	sticklers	for	cleanliness	hated	the	unclean,	modern
ones	were	repulsed	by	the	old fashioned,	and	so	on.	And	so	on	and	on!	And	on!
What	else	can	I	say?	Syphon	died.	Raped	through	the	ears,	he	could	not	recover,
he	could	not	by	any	manner	or	means	rid	himself	of	those	hostile	elements	which
had	been	forced	into	his	ears.	He	agonized	in	vain,	he	tried	for	hours	on	end	to
forget	those	words	of	initiation	that	had	been	forced	upon	him.	He	felt	nothing
but	disgust	for	his	tainted	self	and	walked	around	with	a	foul	taste,	growing
more	and	more	pale	each	day,	burping	constantly,	spitting,	choking,	wheezing,
coughing,	unable	to	do	anything,	until	finally,	one	afternoon,	feeling	totally
worthless,	he	hanged	himself	from	a	coat	rack.	This	caused	a	great	uproar,	there
were	even	press	releases.	Nonetheless,	it	was	of	little	use	to	Kneadus,	Syphon's
death	didn't	improve	the	condition	of	his	mug	one	bit.	Syphon	died,	so	what?
The	faces	that	Kneadus	had	pulled	during	the	duel	still	stuck	to	him—it's	not
easy	to	be	rid	of	a	grimace,	a	face	is	not	made	of	rubber,	once	it	is	distorted	it
does	not	easily	return	to	its	former	shape.	And	so	he	walked	around	with	a	face
so	ugly	that	even	his	friends,	Hopek	and	Mizdral,	avoided	him	whenever	they
could.	And	the	more	monstrous	he	looked,	the	more—of	course—he	panted	after
the	farmhand;	and	the	more	he	panted,	the	more	hideous—of	course—his	mug
became.	Misery	brought	us	closer,	he	was	panting	for	the	farmhand,	I	for	the
schoolgirl,	and	so	time	passed	slowly	in	this	joint	panting,	and,	as	if	a	rash	were
covering	our	faces,	reality	became	unattainable	and	inaccessible	to	us.	He	told
me	that	he	stood	a	chance	of	seducing	the	Youngbloods'	housemaid—the	other
night,	while	soused,	he	forced	a	kiss	on	her	as	he	was	going	out	through	the
kitchen,	but	this	did	not	satisfy	him	in	the	least.
"It's	not	the	same	thing,"	he	kept	saying,	"not	the	same.	To	steal	a	kiss	from	a
hussy?	It's	true	the	hussy's	a	bare footed	country	girl	and,	as	I	found	out,	she
does	have	a	farmhand	for	a	brother,	but	so	what,	shit,	damn,	crap	(and	other
expressions	which	I	won't	repeat),	a	sister	is	not	the	same	as	a	brother,	a
housemaid	is	not	a	farmhand.	I	go	to	her	in	the	evenings	when	that	Mrs.
Youngblood	of	yours	is	at	her	committee	meetings,	I	wag	my	tongue,	I	shoot	off
my	mouth,	I	even	talk	like	a	peasant,	but	still	she	won't	take	me	for	one	of	her
own."
And	so	his	world	was	shaping	itself—the	housemaid	taking	second	place,	the
farmhand	first	place.	But	my	world	had	moved—lock,	stock,	and	barrel—from
school	to	the	Youngbloods'	home.With	a	mother's	perspicacity	the	Youngblood	woman	soon	noticed	that	I	was
infatuated	with	her	daughter.	I	need	not	add	that	the	engineer's	wife—duly
excited	by	Pimko	to	begin	with—became	even	more	excited	by	this	discovery.
An	old fashioned	and	affected	boy,	unable	to	hide	his	admiration	for	the
schoolgirl's	modern	attributes,	was	like	a	tongue	with	which	she	could	sense	and
relish	all	her	daughter's	charms,	and,	indirectly—her	own.	And	so	I	became	a
tongue	to	the	fat	woman,	and	the	more	old fashioned,	insincere,	and	affected	I
became	the	more	they	developed	a	sense	of	modernity,	sincerity,	and	simplicity.
And	thus	the	two	infantile	realities—modern,	old fashioned—stimulating	each
other,	chafing	and	exciting	each	other	with	a	thousand	of	the	strangest	electric
shocks,	cumulated	and	rose	into	a	world	that	became	more	and	more
fragmentary	and	green.	And	the	upshot	of	it	was	that	the	old	Youngblood	woman
began	to	strut	before	me	like	a	peacock,	flaunting	and	showing	off	her
modernity,	which	was	purely	and	simply	a	surrogate	for	youth.	At	mealtimes,
whenever	we	found	time,	there	were	conversations	about	Moral	Freedom,	the
Era,	Revolutionary	Upheavals,	about	Postwar	Times,	etc.,	that	went	on	endlessly,
and	the	old	woman	was	thrilled	that	the	Era	was	making	her	younger	than	the
boy	who	was	younger	by	age.	She	turned	herself	into	a	young	woman,	and	she
turned	me	into	a	little	old	man.
"So	how	goes	it,	our	young	little	old	man?"	she	would	ask,	"our	rotten	egg?"
And	with	the	sophistication	of	the	intelligent,	modern	engineer's	wife	that	she
was,	she	tormented	me	with	her	vitality,	and	with	her	experience	of	life,	and	with
the	fact	that	she	knew	what	life	was	all	about,	and	with	having	been	kicked
during	the	first	World	War	while	a	nurse	in	the	trenches,	and	with	her
enthusiasm,	and	with	her	wide	horizons,	and	with	the	liberalism	of	the	Avant 
garde,	Active,	and	Bold	woman,	and	also	with	her	modern	ways,	daily	baths,	and
with	what	had	thus	far	been	a	covert	activity—her	now	overt	visits	to	the	toilet.
Strange,	strange	things!	Pimko	came	to	visit	me	from	time	to	time.	The	old
teacher	delighted	in	my	pupa.	"What	a	pupa,"	he	purred,	"unsurpassed!"	and	he
seized	every	opportunity	to	flatter	the	Youngblood	woman	by	exaggerating	his
old fashioned	pedagogical	genre,	and	he	continued	to	be	utterly	shocked	by	the
modern	schoolgirl.	I	noticed	that	elsewhere,	as	at	school	with	Mr.	Piorkowski,
for	example,	Pimko	didn't	present	himself	as	particularly	old,	nor	did	he	adhere
to	those	old fashioned	principles,	and	I	couldn't	quite	grasp	whether	it	was	the
Youngbloods	who	elicited	his	old fashioned	ways,	or—on	the	contrary—it	was
he	who	elicited	the	Youngbloods'	modernity,	or	whether—in	the	final	analysis—
they	played	off	each	other	for	some	higher	rhyme	or	reason.	I	don't	know	to	thisday	whether	Pimko,	otherwise	the	absolute	prof,	was	forced	by	Miss
Youngblood's	postwar	unruliness	into	becoming	one	of	those	prewar	species	of
prof,	or	whether	he	provoked	her	unruliness	by	purposefully	adopting	the	mien
of	an	unhappy,	inept,	and	kindly	granddaddy.	Who	created	whom—did	the
modern	schoolgirl	create	the	granddaddy,	or	did	the	granddaddy	create	the
modern	schoolgirl?	A	rather	useless	and	sterile	question.	But	how	strangely
whole	worlds	can	crystallize	between	two	people's	calves.
One	way	or	another,	they	both	thrived—he	as	the	pedagogue	of	bygone	views
and	principles,	Zuta	as	the	unbridled	youth—and	gradually	his	visits	became
longer,	he	devoted	less	attention	to	me	and	concentrated	more	on	the	modern
one.	Need	I	tell	you?—I	was	jealous	of	Pimko.	I	suffered	terribly	as	I	watched
the	two	of	them	fulfilling	each	other,	concurring	in	everything,	rhyming	little
lyrics	and	together	creating	spicy	little	old new	poetry,	and	it	was	horrible	to
watch	how	this	antique	of	a	man—his	calves	a	thousandfold	inferior	to	mine—
was	more	in	synchrony	with	this	modern	girl	than	I	was.	Norwid	in	particular
became	the	pretext	for	a	thousand	frolics,	the	kindly	Pimko	couldn't	acquiesce	to
her	ignorance	of	the	subject,	it	offended	his	most	sacred	sentiments,	while	she
preferred	pole vaulting—he	constantly	expressed	indignation,	she	laughed,	he'd
recommend	something,	she'd	have	none	of	it,	he	entreated	her,	she'd	just	hop	and
skip—and	on	and	on	and	on!	I	admired	the	wisdom	and	maturity	with	which	the
prof,	while	not	for	a	moment	ceasing	to	be	a	prof	and	always	acting	on	the
principle	of	a	prof,	was	nevertheless	able	to	derive	pleasure	from	the	modern
schoolgirl	by	means	of	contrast	and	antithesis,	how	he	excited	her
schoolgirlishness	with	his	"prof"	while	she	incited	him	with	her
schoolgirlishness	to	be	the	prof.	I	was	terribly	jealous—after	all,	I	too	incited	her
antithetically	and	was	in	turn	excited	by	her—but,	O	my	God,	I	didn't	want	to	be
old fashioned	with	her,	I	wanted	to	be	modern!
Oh,	what	torment,	torment,	torment!	I	could	not,	I	just	could	not	set	myself	free.
All	my	efforts	came	to	naught.	My	derision—I	spared	her	none	in	my	thoughts
—brought	no	results,	in	fact,	what	does	cheap	derision	behind	someone's	back
accomplish?	Anyway,	all	the	derision	was	nothing	but	homage.	Because	deep
within	the	derision	lurked	a	poisonous	desire	to	please	her—and	deriding	her
probably	served	no	other	purpose	than	to	adorn	myself	with	the	peacock	feathers
of	derision—and	was	simply	the	result	of	her	negation	of	me.	But	the	derision
turned	against	me	and	made	my	mug	look	even	uglier	and	more	horrible.	And	I
dared	not	deride	her	openly—she	would	just	have	shrugged	her	shoulders.
Because	a	girl,	similar	in	this	to	everyone	else,	will	never	be	intimidated	bysomeone	who	derides	her	just	because	he's	been	refused	admission	...	And	the
only	effect	that	my	clownish	attack	on	her	had,	that	time	in	her	room,	was	that
from	then	on	she	was	on	guard	against	me,	she	ignored	me—she	ignored	me	as
befits	a	modern	schoolgirl,	realizing	perfectly	well	how	much	in	love	I	was	with
her	modern	charms.	She	therefore	intensified	those	charms	with	the	refined
cruelty	of	a	magpie,	though	carefully	avoiding	any	hint	of	coquetry	that	might
make	her	dependent	on	me.	She	became,	just	to	please	herself,	more	wild	and
impudent,	more	bold,	harsh,	lithe,	sporty,	leggy,	and	she	promptly	let	herself	be
carried	away	by	her	own	modern	charms.	She	would	sit	down	to	dinner,	oh,	so
mature	in	her	immaturity,	so	self assured,	indifferent,	and	self contained,	while	I
sat	there	for	her,	for	her,	I	sat	there	for	her	alone,	and	I	couldn't	miss	a	single
second	of	sitting	for	her,	I	was	within	her,	she	enclosed	me	within	herself,	my
derision	and	all,	her	likes	and	dislikes	meant	the	world	to	me,	and	I	could	like
myself	only	as	much	as	she	liked	me.	What	torture—to	be	totally	stuck	within	a
modern	schoolgirl.	And	never,	not	even	once,	did	I	catch	her	letting	go	of	that
modern	style	in	the	slightest,	never	providing	me	with	a	chink	through	which	I
could	escape	to	freedom,	to	bolt!
This	was	precisely	what	captivated	me—the	maturity	and	autonomy	of	her
youth,	the	self assurance	of	her	style.	While	we	in	school	had	our	blackheads,
constantly	broke	out	in	pimples	and	ideals,	while	our	movements	were	gawky
and	each	step	was	a	gaffe—her	
exterieur	
was	entrancingly	polished.	Youth,	for
her,	was	not	a	transitional	age—for	this	modern	one,	youth	was	the	only	time
befitting	a	human	being—she	disdained	maturity,	immaturity	was	her	maturity—
she	had	no	time	for	beards,	mustaches,	wet	nurses,	mothers	with	children—and
this	was	the	source	of	her	magical	power.	Her	youth	had	no	need	of	ideals,	it	was
in	and	of	itself	an	ideal.	No	wonder	that,	tormented	by	idealistic	youth,	I	too
thirsted	for	that	ideal	youth,	like	a	mushroom	for	rain.	But	she	didn't	want	me!
She	put	the	screws	to	my	mug!	And	with	every	passing	day	she	tightened	the
screws	so	that	my	mug	looked	more	and	more	horrible.
By	God—how	she	tortured	that	"beauty"	of	mine!	Oh,	I	know	no	greater	cruelty
than	that	of	one	human	being	putting	the	screws	to	the	mug	of	another.	No	holds
barred,	just	shove	it	into	the	ridiculous,	the	grotesque,	make	a	sham	of	it,
because	the	ugliness	of	one	man	sustains	the	beauty	of	another,	and	oh,	believe
me,	dealing	someone	the	pupa	is	nothing	compared	to	putting	the	screws	to
someone's	mug!	I	was	finally	at	my	wits'	end,	and	I	began	to	dream	up	wild
schemes	in	which	I	physically	destroyed	the	schoolgirl.	To	disfigure	that	little
face	of	hers.	To	put	out	of	shape	that	nose	of	hers,	to	cut	it	off.	But	if	theexample	of	Kneadus	and	Syphon	served	any	purpose	it	was	to	show	that	brute
force	isn't	much	good,	no,	the	soul	has	little	use	for	the	nose,	the	soul	is	set	free
by	spiritual	mastery	alone.	But	what	could	I	do	when	my	soul	was	stuck	inside
her,	when	I	was	within	her	and	she	was	hemming	me	in.	Is	it	possible	to	extricate
oneself	from	someone,	under	one's	own	power,	when	that	person	is	one's	only
support,	the	only	contact	you	have,	when	that	person's	style	dominates	you
completely?	No,	not	under	your	own	power,	that's	impossible,	totally	out	of	the
question.	Unless	a	third	person	helps	you	from	the	sidelines,	offers	you	at	least
the	tip	of	his	finger.	But	who	could	help	me?	Kneadus,	who	never	visited	the
Youngbloods	(except	in	their	kitchen,	on	the	sly)	and	was	never	a	party	to	my
association	with	the	schoolgirl?	Mr.	Youngblood,	Mrs.	Youngblood,	or	Pimko?
—they	were	the	schoolgirl's	sworn	allies.	Or	finally,	a	housemaid	for	hire,	a
creature	without	a	voice?	All	the	while	my	mug	became	more	and	more	horrible,
and	the	more	horrible	it	became	the	more	the	two	Youngblood	women	hardened
in	their	modern	style	and	tightened	the	screws	on	my	mug.	Oh,	style—the	tool	of
tyranny!	Oh,	damnation!	But	the	two	hags	miscalculated!	Because	the	time	came
when,	quite	by	chance	and	thanks	to	Mr.	Youngblood	(yes,	Mr.	Youngblood),	the
trammels	of	their	style	loosened,	and	little	by	little	I	regained	my	power.	And
then	I	went	on	the	offensive,	full	steam	ahead.	Forward	and	away,	giddy up,
giddy up,	ride	roughshod	over	style,	over	the	modern	schoolgirl's	beauty!
A	strange	thing—I	owe	my	liberation	to	the	engineer	because,	were	it	not	for	the
engineer,	I	would	have	been	imprisoned	forever,	but	he	unwittingly	brought
about	a	small	shift,	and	the	schoolgirl	suddenly	found	herself	inside	me	and	not	I
inside	her,	yes,	the	engineer	pulled	his	daughter	inside	me,	and	I'll	be	grateful	to
him	until	the	day	I	die.	I	remember	how	it	started.	I	remember	that	day—I	come
home	from	school	for	dinner.	The	Youngbloods	are	already	at	the	table,	the
housemaid	brings	potato	soup,	the	schoolgirl	also	sits	there—she	sits	perfectly,
with	her	slightly	Bolshevik	
physique kultur,	
in	sneakers.	She	didn't	eat	much
soup	that	day—instead	she	gulped	a	glass	of	water	and	followed	it	with	a	slice	of
bread,	she	stayed	away	from	the	soup—a	watered down	mush,	warm	and	too
effortless,	definitely	bad	for	her	type—and	she	probably	wanted	to	go	hungry	as
long	as	possible,	at	least	until	the	meat	dish,	because	a	hungry	modern	girl	is
more	classy	than	a	satiated	modern	girl.	Mrs.	Youngblood	also	ate	very	little
soup,	and	she	didn't	ask	how	my	day	went	at	school.	Why	didn't	she	ask?
Because	she	didn't	go	for	those	motherly	questions,	she	was	generally	a	bit
disgusted	with	"mother,"	she	disliked	"mother."	She	preferred	"sister."
"Here	you	are,	Victor,	have	some	salt,"	she	said	in	the	
tone	of	
a	true	and	faithfulcomrade	and	a	reader	of	H.	G.	Wells,	as	she	passed	the	salt	to	her	husband,	and,
with	her	gaze	turned	partly	into	the	future,	partly	into	space,	a	gaze	emphasizing
the	humanitarian	revolt	of	a	human	being	who	combats	the	infamy	of	social	ills,
injustice,	and	injury,	she	added:
"Capital	punishment	is	obsolete."
Whereupon	Mr.	Youngblood,	that	man	of	Europe,	an	engineer	and	enlightened
urban	planner	who	studied	in	Paris,	whence	he	brought	that	dark,	European	flair
—that	man	then,	casual	in	his	attire,	sporting	new	yellow	buckskin	shoes	that
looked	very	striking	on	him,	wearing	horn rimmed	glasses	and	his	collar	
à	la
poet	Slowacki—a	robust	pacifist	devoid	of	prejudices,	an	admirer	of
scientifically	organized	work,	and	given	to	telling	scientific	jokes	and	anecdotes,
and	cabaret	jokes,	took	the	salt	and	said:
"Thank	you,	Joanna."
And,	in	the	tone	of	an	enlightened	pacifist,	but	with	a	hint	of	the	engineering
student's	voice,	he	added:
"In	Brazil	they	dump	whole	barrels	of	salt	in	water,	while	we	pay	six	groszes	per
gramme.	Oh,	those	politicians!	We	are	the	experts.	The	world	needs
reorganizing.	League	of	Nations."
Whereupon	the	Youngblood	woman	took	a	deep	breath	and,	envisioning	a	better
tomorrow	and	Zeromski's	glass	houses	of	the	future—referring	to	the	tradition	of
struggle	of	yesterday's	Poland	and	striving	for	the	Poland	of	tomorrow—she	said
sensibly:
"Zuta,	who	was	that	boy	who	walked	you	home	from	school	today?	You	don't
have	to	answer	if	you	don't	want	to.	You	know	I'm	not	one	to	pressure	or
embarrass	you	in	any	way."
The	Youngblood	girl	nonchalantly	ate	a	piece	of	bread.
"I	don't	know,"	she	replied.
"You	don't	know?"	the	mother	asked	pleasandy.
"He	accosted	me,"	said	the	schoolgirl.
"Accosted	you?"	Mr.	Youngblood	asked.
It	was	just	an	offhand	question.	But	the	very	fact	that	he	asked	it	loaded	the	issue
and	may	have	created	the	impression	of	outdated	fatherly	disapproval.	That's
why	the	Youngblood	woman	intervened.
"And	what's	so	strange	about	that?"	she	exclaimed	with	what	seemed	excessive
cheekiness.	"He	accosted	her—big	deal!	Let	him!	Zuta,	did	you	make	a	datewith	him?	Great!	Perhaps	you'd	like	to	go	kayaking	with	him—for	the	whole
day?	Or	maybe	you'd	like	to	go	away	for	the	weekend	and	not	come	back	at
night?	Don't	come	back	then,"	she	said	obligingly,	"go	ahead	and	stay	overnight!
And	maybe	you'd	like	to	go	without	any	money,	maybe	you'd	like	him	to	pay	for
you,	or	maybe	you'd	rather	pay	for	him,	so	he'd	be	on	your	keep—in	that	case	I'll
give	you	some	money.	But	on	the	other	hand,	I'm	sure	you'll	both	manage
without	money,	eh?"	she	exclaimed	harshly,	insisting	with	her	whole	body,	it
seemed.	Indeed,	the	engineer's	wife	overshot	the	mark	a	bit,	but	the	daughter
deftly	staved	off	her	mother,	who	was	trying,	all	too	obviously,	to	live
vicariously	through	her	daughter.
"Yes,	yes,	Mother,"	the	girl	dismissed	her,	and	declined	a	second	helping	of	meat
patties	because	ground	meat	did	not	agree	with	her—it	was	too	mushy	and
somehow	too	easy	on	her.	The	modern	girl	was	wary	of	her	parents,	she	never	let
them	get	too	close	to	her.
But	the	engineer	had	already	caught	his	wife's	drift.	And	since	she	had
insinuated	that	he	disapproved	of	the	fact	that	his	daughter	had	been	accosted,	he
was	eager,	in	his	turn,	to	show	his	mettle.	They	thus	went	on	catching	each
other's	drift.	And	he	exclaimed:
"Of	course	there's	nothing	wrong	with	it!	Zuta,	if	you	want	to	have	an
illegitimate	child,	be	my	guest!	And	what's	wrong	with	that?!	The	cult	of
virginity	is	no	more!	We—designer engineers	of	the	new	social	reality—
repudiate	the	old time	hayseeds'	cult	of	virginity!"
He	took	a	gulp	of	water	and,	sensing	that	he	may	have	gone	too	far,	broke	off.
However,	the	Youngblood	woman	picked	up	the	drift	again	and	began,
indirectly,	in	a	vague	sort	of	way,	to	egg	on	her	daughter	to	have	an	illegitimate
child,	she	expressed	her	liberalism,	talked	about	conditions	in	America,	quoted
Benjamin	Barr	Lindsay,	and	underscored	contemporary	youth's	unique	ease	in
this	matter,	etc.,	etc....	This	suddenly	turned	into	the	Youngbloods'	favorite
hobbyhorse.	When	one	of	them	got	off,	sensing	that	he	or	she	had	gone	too	far,
the	other	mounted	it	again	and	sped	on.	It	was	all	the	more	strange,	because,	as
I've	said	before,	they	all	(including	Mr.	Youngblood)	didn't	like	the	idea	of
mother,	of	child.	But	please	understand	that	they	mounted	the	idea	not	from	a
mother's	side	but	from	a	schoolgirl's	side,	nor	from	the	child's	side—they	didn't
care	about	the	child,	only	about	its	illegitimacy.	And	especially	the	Youngblood
woman	wanted	to	move	to	the	forefront	of	history	through	her	daughter's
illegitimate	child,	to	have	the	child	conceived	casually,	easily,	boldly,
impudently,	in	the	bushes,	on	a	sports	trip	with	her	contemporary,	just	as	theydescribe	it	in	modern	love	stories,	
etc.
	Actually,	just	talking	about	it	and	egging
on	the	schoolgirl	was	enough	to	produce	the	flavor	they	desired.	And	they
reveled	in	it	all	the	more,	because	they	sensed	my	impotence	in	relation	to	the
girl—indeed,	thus	far	I	had	been	unable	to	defend	myself	against	the	charms	of
the	seventeen year old	in	the	bushes.
But	they	overlooked	the	fact	that	on	this	particular	day	I	was	too	depleted	to	feel
any	jealousy.	Indeed—for	two	weeks	straight	they	had	been	putting	the	screws	to
my	mug	until	finally	my	mug	became	so	awful	that	there	was	nothing	left	with
which	I	could	be	jealous.	I	suspected	that	the	boy	Mrs.	Youngblood	had
mentioned	was	probably	Kopyrda,	but	what	of	it,	so	what—there	was	nothing
but	grief	and	sadness—sadness	and	misery—misery	and	great	weariness,	and
resignation.	So	instead	of	thinking	my	thoughts	in	sky blue green	colors,	giving
them	a	fresh	and	bold	form,	I	opted	for	the	puny	and	the	miserable:	"Well,	a
child	is	a	child,"	I	thought	to	myself,	and	I	imagined	labor,	wet	nurses,	illnesses,
exudative	skin	rashes,	child related	messiness	and	living	expenses,	and	I	thought
that	an	infant,	with	its	milk	and	baby	warmth,	would	destroy	the	girl,	turning	her
into	a	lubberly,	warm	little	mommy.	I	therefore	leaned	toward	Miss	Youngblood,
and	miserably,	as	if	speaking	to	myself,	I	said:
"Mommy..."
And	I	said	it	warmly,	mawkishly,	with	great	sadness,	and	I	infused	the	word	with
all	the	sickly sweet mommy	warmth	that	they,	with	their	harsh,	brisk,	girlish,
and	youthful	vision	of	the	world,	wouldn't	even	consider.	Why	did	I	say	it?	Well,
just	so,	for	no	particular	reason.	The	girl	was,	like	all	girls,	first	and	foremost,	an
aesthete,	good	looks	were	her	main	assignment,	whereas,	by	matching	her	type
with	the	warm,	emotional,	and	somewhat	sloppy negligée	expression	"Mommy,"
I	was	creating	something	disgustingly	slovenly	and	indecorous.	I	hoped	she'd
have	a	fit.	Yet	I	knew	she	would	duck	me	and	that	the	ugliness	would	be	mine
again,	because	the	way	things	were	between	us,	anything	I	attempted	against	her
would	stick	fast	to	me,	as	if	I	were	spitting	into	the	wind.
But	lo	and	behold—Mr.	Youngblood	giggled!
His	guttural	giggle	surprised	him,	and,	embarrassed,	he	grabbed	the	tablecloth—
he	went	on	giggling,	his	eyes	bulged,	he	choked	and	roared	into	the	tablecloth,
horribly,	mechanically,	in	spite	of	himself.	I	was	astounded!	What	was	it	that	had
so	tickled	his	nervous	system?	The	expression	"Mommy"?	He	must	have	been
amused	by	the	contrast	between	his	"girl"	and	my	"Mommy,"	something	clicked,
cabaret	humor	perhaps,	or	perhaps	my	sad	and	doleful	voice	had	led	him	tohumanity's	backyard.	He	had	the	capacity,	common	to	all	engineers,	of	being
easily	tickled	by	
szmonces,	
and	my	phrase	had	indeed	the	flavor	of	a	
szmonces
{8}
.
And	the	more	he	had	reveled,	a	moment	ago,	in	the	idea	of	an	illegitimate	child,
the	more	he	now	giggled.	His	glasses	fell	off	his	nose.
"Victor,"	Mrs.	Youngblood	said.
But	I	stepped	on	the	gas:
"Mommy,	Mommy..."
"I'm	sorry,	I'm	sorry,"	he	giggled,	"I'm	sorry,	so	sorry...	But	just	imagine	it!	So
help	me!	I'm	sorry..."
The	girl	bent	over	her	plate,	and	I	suddenly	saw,	almost	physically,	that	through
her	father's	giggling,	my	words	had	touched	her—so	after	all	I	did	touch	her,	she
was	now	touched—yes,	yes,	I	was	not	mistaken,	her	father's	laughter	(aside,	as	it
were)	had	changed	things	around,	it	had	extricated	me	from	the	schoolgirl.	I
could	finally	touch	her!	I	sat	quiet	as	a	mouse.
Her	parents	also	noticed	it	and	ran	to	her	rescue.
"Victor,	I'm	surprised	at	you,"	the	Youngblood	woman	said	with	displeasure,
"our	little	old	man's	remarks	aren't	in	the	least	witty.	It's	a	pose,	nothing	more!"
The	engineer	finally	controlled	his	laughter.
"You	think	I	was	laughing	at	this,	do	you?	Never	on	my	life,	I	didn't	even	hear	it
—it's	something	I've	just	remembered	..."
But	their	efforts	only	served	to	involve	the	schoolgirl	even	more.	Although	I
didn't	quite	understand	what	was	happening	I	repeated	"Mommy,	Mommy"	a
couple	of	times	in	the	same	sleepy,	puny	little	voice,	and,	by	repeating	it,	the
word	must	have	gained	new	strength	because	the	engineer	giggled	again,	briefly,
then	laughed	with	a	jerky,	guttural,	choking	laughter.	And	it	must	have	all
appeared	funny	to	him	because	he	suddenly	burst	into	unrestrained	laughter,
stuffing	his	mouth	with	a	napkin.
"Stop	butting	in!"	the	Youngblood	woman	shouted	at	me	angrily,	but	her	anger
served	to	involve	the	daughter	even	more,	because	the	girl	shrugged	her
shoulders.
"Oh,	let	it	be,	Mother,"	she	remarked	with	apparent	indifference,	but	this	too
drew	her	in.	Strange	as	it	seemed—the	configuration	between	us	changed	so
radically	that	every	single	word	drew	them	in	more	and	more.	Actually,	it	was	all
rather	nice.	I	felt	I	had	regained	my	potency	in	relation	to	the	girl.	Yet	it	no
longer	made	any	difference	to	me.	I	also	felt	I	had	regained	my	potency	because
of	my	very	indifference,	yet	if	I	were	to	make	the	mistake,	even	for	a	splitsecond,	of	substituting	triumph	for	my	former	sadness	and	grief,	my	potency
would	be	instantly	annihilated,	because	it	was	actually	a	strange	superpotency
woven	into	the	canvas	of	a	blatant	and	long suffering	impotency.	Therefore,	to
affirm	my	misery	and	to	underscore	my	indifference,	and	how	unworthy	I	was	of
everything,	I	began	to	dabble	in	my	fruit	compote,	tossing	into	it	bread	crumbs,
bits	of	rubbish,	bread	pellets,	and	stirring	it	with	my	spoon.	I	still	had	my	ugly
mug,	so	what,	this	was	good	enough	for	me—"shit,	what	do	I	care,"	I	thought
sleepily,	adding	a	little	salt,	pepper,	and	a	couple	of	toothpicks,	"oh,	so	what,	I'll
eat	it	all	as	long	as	it	fills	me,	makes	no	difference	..."	It	was	as	if	I	were	lying	in
a	ditch,	little	birdies	flying	about...	stirring	with	my	spoon	I	felt	warm	and	cozy.
"Well,	young	man?	.	.	.	Well,	young	man?	.	.	.	Why	is	our	young	man	dabbling	in
his	compote?"
Mrs.	Youngblood	asked	this	softly	yet	anxiously.	I	lifted	my	inept	gaze	from	the
compote.
"I...	just,	it's	all	the	same	to	me	..."	I	whispered,	calm	and	slime	in	my	voice.	And
I	proceeded	to	eat	the	pap;	and	the	pap	didn't	really	make	the	slightest	difference
to	my	spirit.	It's	hard	to	describe	the	effect	this	had	on	the	Youngbloods,	I	didn't
expect	such	a	powerful	effect.	For	the	third	time	the	engineer	giggled
uncontrollably	with	that	cabaret	giggle,	with	that	backyard,	backside	giggle	of
his.	The	girl	bent	over	her	plate	and	ate	the	compote	in	silence,	with	decorum
and	restraint,	even	with	heroism.	Mrs.	Engineer	turned	pale—she	stared	at	me	as
if	hypnotized,	bug eyed,	she	was	obviously	afraid	of	me.	Afraid!
"It's	just	a	pose!	A	pose!"	she	kept	mumbling.	"Don't	eat	that...	I	forbid	you!
Zuta!	Victor—Zuta!	Victor!	Zuta!	Zuta!	Victor—stop	him,	tell	him	to	stop!	Oh
..."
But	I	went	on	eating,	because	why	shouldn't	I?	I'll	eat	it	all,	I'd	eat	a	dead	rat,	it's
all	the	same	to	me	.	.	.	"Hey,	Kneadus,"	I	thought	to	myself,	"this	is	good,	good	.
.	.	It's	good	...	So	what,	what	of	it,	anything	to	stuff	my	mug	with,	so	what,	what
of	it,	so	what..."
"Zuta!"	screeched	the	Youngblood	woman.	To	a	mother,	the	sight	of	her
daughter's	admirer	eating	everything	in	sight	was	unbearable.	But	then	the
schoolgirl,	who	had	just	finished	her	compote,	stood	up	from	the	table	and	left.
Mrs.	Youngblood	followed	her.	Mr.	Youngblood	also	left,	giggling	convulsively
and	stuffing	his	mouth	with	a	napkin.	It	wasn't	clear	whether	they'd	finished
dinner	or	whether	they	were	fleeing.	But	I	knew—they	fled!	I	ran	after	them!
Yippee yeay!	On	with	it,	attack,	catch,	and	thrash	them,	chase,	pursue,	on	theirheels,	nab	and	crush	them,	choke	them,	choke	and	badger	them,	don't	let	up!
Were	they	afraid?	Scare	them	even	more!	Were	they	fleeing?	Chase	them,	then!
But	be	calm,	tread	softly,	softly,	softly,	like	a	beggar	and	a	wretch,	don't	change
the	beggar	into	a	conqueror,	remember	it	was	the	beggar	who	led	you	to
conquest.	They	were	afraid	that	I	might	fix	the	girl's	brain	like	I	had	fixed	the
compote.	Ha,	now	I	knew	how	to	get	at	her	style!	I	would	stuff	her	brain,	her
intellect,	with	anything	I	could	lay	my	hands	on,	then	scramble	it	up,	mince	it
and	stir	it,	by	fair	means	or	foul!	But	keep	calm,	keep	calm	...
Who	would	ever	believe	that	Mr.	Youngblood's	subterranean	giggling	would
restore	my	ability	to	resist	them?	My	thoughts	and	deeds	acquired	claws	again.	I
hadn't	yet	won	the	game,	no.	But	at	least	I	could	act.	I	knew	what	line	to	follow.
The	fruit	compote	made	it	all	clear	to	me.	Just	as	I	had	messed	up	the	compote
by	changing	in	into	a	dissolute	pap,	so	I	could	destroy	the	schoolgirl's	modernity
by	introducing	into	it	foreign	and	heterogeneous	elements,	scrambling
everything	up	for	all	it	was	worth.	Giddy up,	giddy up,	giddy up,	ride	roughshod
over	modern	style,	over	the	modern	schoolgirl's	beauty!	But	quietly,	quietly...9	Peeping	and	Further	Incursion	into	Modernity
I	quietly	went	into	my	room	and	lay	down	on	my	bed.	I	had	to	devise	a	plan	of
action.	I	trembled,	and	sweat	poured	off	me	as	I	realized	that	in	this	pilgrimage
of	mine	I	was	descending,	through	a	sequence	of	defeats,	to	the	very	bottom	of
hell.	Nothing	that	is	really	tasty	can	be	really	awful	(as	the	word	"tasty"
indicates),	and	only	that	which	has	bad	taste	is	truly	inedible.	With	envy,	I	was
reminiscing	about	those	beautiful,	romantic,	classical	crimes,	the	rapes	and
gouging	of	eyes	in	poetry	and	prose—herring	with	jam,	that	I	know	are	awful,
unlike	those	wonderful	and	beautiful	crimes	in	Shakespeare.	So	don't	talk	to	me,
don't,	about	those	rhymed	agonies	we	swallow	as	easily	as	oysters,	don't	talk
about	the	candy	of	disgrace,	about	the	chocolate	cream	of	horror,	the	little	cakes
of	wretchedness,	about	the	lollipops	of	suffering	and	sweetmeats	of	despair.	So
why	does	this	busybody	of	a	woman,	who	uses	her	finger	to	tear	at	the	most
bloody	social	ills,	death	by	starvation	of	a	worker's	family	of	six,	why,	I	ask,
does	she	not	dare,	with	the	same	finger,	to	pick	her	ear	in	public?	Because	this
would	have	been	much	more	dreadful.	Death	from	starvation,	or	the	death	of	a
million	in	war—this	can	be	eaten,	even	relished—yet	there	still	exist	in	this
world	combinations	that	are	not	edible,	that	make	us	vomit,	that	are	bad,
discordant,	repulsive,	and	repellent,	oh,	even	satanic,	and	these	the	human
organism	rejects.	And	yet	our	first	and	foremost	task	is	to	relish,	we	must	relish,
relish,	let	the	husband,	wife,	and	children	lie	dying,	let	our	heart	be	torn	to
shreds,	as	long	as	it's	done	tastefully,	yes,	tastefully!	Indeed,	that	which	I	was
about	to	undertake	in	the	name	of	Maturity,	and	in	order	to	free	myself	from	the
schoolgirl's	spell,	would	be	an	anti culinary	and	a	counter palatable	activity,
something	the	gullet	finds	quite	revolting!
Anyway,	I	didn't	delude	myself—my	success	at	lunch	was	rather	dubious,	it
mainly	affected	the	parents,	the	girl	escaped	unharmed,	she	remained	distant	and
unattainable.	How	could	I	defile	her	modern	style	from	a	distance?	How	was	I	to
pull	her	into	the	orbit	of	my	activity?	And,	in	addition	to	the	psychological
distance,	there	was	also	the	physical	distance—she	saw	me	only	during	lunch
and	dinner.	How	could	I	break	her	down,	pierce	her	mentally	from	a	distance,
that	is,	when	I	was	not	with	her,	when	she	was	alone?	"Perhaps,"	I	went	on	with
my	lame	thinking,	"by	peeping	and	eavesdropping."	The	Youngbloods	had	paved
the	way	for	me	because	they	had	perceived	me,	from	the	first	moment	of	our
encounter,	as	an	eavesdropper	and	a	Peeping	Tom.	"And	who	knows,"	I	thought,
drowsy	but	hopeful,	"perhaps	if	I	put	my	eye	to	the	keyhole	I'll	immediately	seein	her	something	repugnant,	many	a	beauty	in	her	own	room	behaves	repulsively
till	one	splits	one's	sides."	But	then	again	there	was	the	danger	that	some
schoolgirls,	impressed	with	their	own	charms	and	well	disciplined	in	style,	are	as
much	on	their	guard	in	solitude	as	they	are	in	public.	Hence,	instead	of	ugliness	I
could	equally	well	behold	beauty,	and	beauty	beheld	in	solitude	is	even	more
lethal.	I	remembered	walking	unexpectedly	into	her	room	and	finding	the
schoolgirl,	the	shoe	cloth	by	her	leg,	in	a	very	stylish	posture—yes,	but	on	the
other	hand,	the	very	fact	of	peeping	would	despoil	and	pierce	her,	because	while
we	act	hideously	and	peep	at	a	beauty,	something	from	our	gaze	settles	on	that
beauty.
I	reasoned	this	as	if	in	a	fever—I	finally	dragged	myself	off	the	bed	and	directed
myself	toward	the	keyhole.	However,	before	I	put	my	eye	to	the	hole	I	looked
out	the	window—it	was	a	beautiful	autumn	day,	bright	and	clear,	and,	in	the
street	brightened	by	autumn,	Kneadus	was	creeping	toward	the	kitchen	door.	He
was	apparently	making	his	way	to	the	housemaid.	Pigeons	flew	in	the	bright
sunshine	and	over	the	roof	of	a	neighboring	house,	then	flocked	together,	the
horn	of	a	car	sounded	in	the	distance,	a	nursemaid	played	with	a	child	on	the
sidewalk,	windowpanes	bathed	in	the	setting	sun.	A	beggar	stood	in	front	of	the
house,	an	old,	bedraggled	beggar,	one	of	those	burly,	hairy,	bearded	duffers	who
hang	around	church	doors.	The	sight	of	the	bearded	man	gave	me	an	idea—I
went	sleepily	and	sluggishly	out	to	the	street	and	to	a	nearby	square	where	I
broke	off	a	green	twig.
"Listen,	old	fellow,"	I	said,	"here's	fifty	groszes.	I'll	give	you	one	zloty	this
evening,	but	you	must	put	this	twig	between	your	teeth	and	remain	with	it	until
nightfall."
The	bearded	man	stuck	the	greenery	in	his	mouth.	I	blessed	the	money	that	wins
allies	and	returned	to	my	room.	I	put	my	eye	to	the	keyhole.	The	schoolgirl	was
moving	about,	as	girls	are	wont	to	do	in	their	rooms.	She	shifted	things	in	her
drawers,	took	out	a	notebook,	placed	it	on	a	table,	I	saw	her	face	in	profile—the
face	of	a	typical	schoolgirl	looking	at	a	notebook.
I	went	on	peeping	like	a	miserable	wretch	from	four	in	the	afternoon	till	six
(while	the	beggar	continuously	held	the	twig	in	his	mouth),	I	waited	in	vain	for
any	sign	of	anxiety	that	may	have	resulted	from	the	defeat	sustained	at	lunch,
such	as	biting	her	lip	or	wrinkling	her	forehead.	But	no.	As	if	nothing	had
changed.	As	if	I	did	not	exist.	As	if	nothing	had	disturbed	her	schoolgirlishness.
Time	passed,	her	schoolgirlishness	became	more	and	more	cruel	and	cold,	more
and	more	indifferent,	remote,	and	it	seemed	unlikely	that	there	was	any	possibleway	to	sully	the	schoolgirl,	who	behaved	the	same	way	in	solitude	as	she	did	in
public.	As	if	nothing	had	happened	at	lunch.	At	about	six	o'clock	the	door	to	the
girl's	room	opened	suddenly,	cunningly—Mrs.	Engineer	stood	on	the	threshold.
"Are	you	working?"	she	asked	with	relief,	scrutinizing	her	daughter.	"Are	you
working?"
"I'm	doing	my	German,"	the	schoolgirl	replied.
The	mother	breathed	more	easily.
"You're	working—that's	good.	Keep	working,	keep	working."
She	stroked	the	girl's	head,	reassured.	Had	she	too	expected	that	her	daughter
might	come	apart?	Zuta	impatiently	drew	back	her	cute	little	head.	The	mother
wanted	to	say	something,	opened	her	mouth	and	closed	it—she	checked	herself.
She	cast	around	a	suspicious	eye.
"Work!	Work!	Work!"	she	went	on	nervously.	"Keep	busy—work	hard.	And	this
evening	sneak	out	to	a	dance—sneak	out	to	a	dance sneak	out	to	a	dance.	Come
back	late,	fall	asleep	like	a	log	..."
"Don't	bother	me,	Mother!"	Zuta	exclaimed	harshly.	"I	don't	have	time!"
Her	mother	looked	at	her,	trying	to	conceal	her	admiration.	The	schoolgirl's
harshness	reassured	her	completely.	She	realized	that	her	daughter	hadn't	gone	to
pieces	at	lunchtime.	But	the	schoolgirl's	brutal	sharpness	grabbed	me	by	the
throat.	The	sharpness	was	aimed	directly	at	herself,	and	nothing	pains	us	to	the
same	degree	as	watching	our	beloved	when	she's	not	only	inexorably	sharp
toward	us	but	also,	in	our	absence,	as	if	in	advance,	is	hardening	herself.	And
with	this	her	manifestation	was	painfully	imprinted	with	the	girl's	brutality.	After
Mrs.	Youngblood's	departure	she	brought	her	profile	back	to	the	notebook	and,
self sufficient,	detached,	and	brutal,	resumed	her	lessons.
I	felt	that	I	could	no	longer	allow	the	girl	to	manifest	herself	in	solitude,	and
unless	I	could	establish	contact	between	her	and	my	peeping,	things	would	take	a
tragic	turn.	Instead	of	defiling	her,	I	was	delighting	in	her	person,	instead	of
catching	her	by	the	throat,	she	was	catching	me	by	the	throat.	I	swallowed	my
saliva	loudly,	right	next	to	the	door,	so	that	she	would	hear	me	and	realize	that	I
was	peeping.	She	shuddered	but	didn't	turn	her	head—which	was	clear	evidence
that	she	had	heard	me—and	she	tucked	her	cute	little	head	between	her
shoulders,	as	if	wounded.	But	her	profile	instantly	ceased	to	exist	in	and	of	itself,
and	therefore,	all	at	once	and	quite	remarkably,	its	beguiling	manifestation
breathed	its	last.	The	girl	with	the	peeped at	profile	fought	long	and	hard	in
silence,	and	the	fight	consisted	of	her	not	batting	an	eye.	She	continued	to	moveher	pen	on	paper,	and	she	behaved	as	if	no	one	were	peeping	at	her.
But	lo	and	behold,	after	a	few	minutes	the	keyhole	itself,	as	if	looking	at	her	with
my	eye,	began	to	bother	hef—and	in	order	to	proclaim	her	independence	and
affirm	her	indifference	she	sniffled	loudly,	she	sniffled	coarsely	and	repulsively
as	if	to	say:	"See,	I	don't	care	a	hoot,	I	can	sniffle	too."	That's	how	girls	show
their	greatest	disdain.	And	that's	exactly	what	I	was	waiting	for.	When	she	made
the	tactical	error	of	sniffling,	I	too	sniffled	near	the	door,	I	sniffled	obviously,	but
not	too	loudly,	as	if	I	couldn't	help	it,	as	if	her	sniffling	were	contagious.	The	girl
became	quiet	as	a	mouse—the	nasal	duet	was	unacceptable	to	her—but	her	nose,
once	set	in	action,	began	to	annoy	her,	and	after	a	brief	struggle	she	was	forced
to	take	out	her	handkerchief	and	blow	her	nose,	and	then	at	longer	intervals	she
sniffled	nervously,	inconspicuously,	which	I	went	on	repeating	near	the	door,
sniffle	by	sniffle.	I	congratulated	myself	on	my	success	in	so	easily	seizing	that
nose	of	hers,	the	girl's	nose	was	infinitely	less	modern	than	the	girl's	legs	and
easier	to	conquer.	By	highlighting	the	nose	and	wresting	it	from	her	I	took	an
enormous	step	forward.	If	only	I	could	make	the	Youngblood	girl	catch	a
nervous	cold,	if	only	I	could	make	her	modernity	catch	a	cold.
And	yet,	after	all	that	sniffling,	she	couldn't	simply	get	up	and	cover	the	keyhole
with	a	piece	of	cloth—this	would	have	been	tantamount	to	admitting	that	the
sniffling	was	a	sign	of	anxiety.	But	shush,	let	us	sniffle	wretchedly,	hopelessly,
let	us	conceal	our	hope!	I	underestimated,	however,	the	girl's	skill	and	craft.
Suddenly,	with	a	wide	sweep	of	her	hand—with	her	whole	forearm—she	wiped
her	nose	from	ear	to	ear,	and	this	bold,	sporty,	feisty,	and	amusing	gesture
changed	the	situation	to	her	advantage	and	adorned	the	sniffling	with	charm.	She
grabbed	me	by	the	throat.	At	the	same	time—I	barely	managed	to	jump	away
from	the	keyhole—cunningly,	unexpectedly,	Mrs.	Youngblood	stepped	into	my
room.
"What	is	our	young	man	doing?"	she	asked	suspiciously	when	she	saw	me
vacillating	in	the	middle	of	the	room.	"Why	is	our	young	man	...	standing	here?
Why	isn't	our	young	man	doing	his	lessons?	Doesn't	our	young	man	participate
in	sports?	You	have	to	get	busy	with	something,"	she	cried	out	in	rage.	She	was
afraid	for	her	daughter.	She	sniffed	some	vague	design	on	her	daughter	in	my	ill 
defined	stance	in	the	middle	of	the	room.	I	made	no	move	to	clarify	anything,	I
continued	to	stand	listlessly	and	awkwardly,	arrested	in	motion,	till	the
Youngblood	woman	turned	sideways.	She	then	saw	the	beggar	in	front	of	the
house.
"What's	this,	he's	got...	?	Why	the	twig	...	in	his	mouth?""Who?"
"The	beggar.	What's	the	meaning	of	this?"
"I	don't	know.	He	stuck	it	in	and	he's	holding	it."
"You	have	talked	to	him,	young	man.	I	saw	it	through	the	window."
"Well	yes,	I	did."
She	scurried	over	my	face	with	her	eyes.	She	swung	like	a	pendulum.	She
suspected	that	the	twig	had	a	hidden	meaning,	a	message	of	hostility	and	malice
toward	her	daughter.	But	she	had	no	idea	what	associations	I	had	in	mind,	she
had	no	way	of	knowing	that	for	me	the	twig	in	the	mouth	had	become	an
attribute	of	modernity.	Her	suspicion	that	it	was	I	who	told	the	bearded	fellow	to
hold	the	greenery	between	his	teeth	was	such	nonsense	that	it	could	not	be	put
into	words.	She	surveyed	my	mind	with	mistrust,	suspecting	that	it	had	fallen
prey	to	a	whim,	and	she	left.	Giddy up,	follow	her!	Hit	her!	Hold	her!	In	swift
pursuit!	She's	the	prisoner	of	my	fantasy!	The	prey	of	my	whim!	Quiet,	quiet!	I
jumped	back	to	the	keyhole.	As	events	developed,	I	found	it	more	and	more
difficult	to	maintain	my	originally	hopeless	and	miserable	posture—the	fight
heated	me	up,	monkey	spitefulness	gained	the	upper	hand	over	exhaustion	and
resignation.	The	schoolgirl	had	disappeared.	Having	heard	voices	on	the	other
side	of	the	wall	she	realized	that	I	was	no	longer	watching	her,	and	this	enabled
her	to	escape	the	trap.	She	went	downtown.	Will	she	notice	the	twig	in	the
beggar's	face,	will	she	guess	for	whose	benefit	the	bearded	man	is	holding	it?
Even	if	she	didn't	guess—the	twig	in	the	bearded	man's	mouth,	the	acrid,	green
bitterness	in	the	beggar's	mouth,	would	have	to	weaken	her,	because	it	would
have	been	too	much	at	odds	with	her	modern	perception	of	the	world.	Dusk	was
falling.	Street	lamps	bathed	the	city	in	violet.	The	caretaker's	little	son	was
returning	from	the	corner	market.	In	the	clear	and	limpid	air,	trees	were	losing
their	leaves.	A	small	airplane	whirred	above	the	houses.	The	front	door
slammed,	announcing	the	Youngblood	woman's	departure.	Mrs.	Engineer,
anxious,	ruffled,	sensing	something	bad	in	the	air,	went	to	her	committee
meeting	to	fortify	herself	with	a	breath	of	something	civic minded,	worldly,	and
mature.
M	adam	Chair	Dear	ladies,	on	today's	agenda	we	have	the	plague	of	abandoned
infants.
Mrs.	Youngblood	Where	are	the	funds	coming	from?
Dusk	was	falling,	and	the	beggar	was	still	under	the	window	with	the	young
greenery,	like	a	discordant	note.	I	was	all	alone	in	the	apartment.	A	SherlockHolmes	situation	began	to	evolve	in	the	empty	rooms,	some	kind	of	a	detective
plot	was	developing	here	as	I	stood	in	the	semi darkness,	looking	for	the
continuation	of	this	happily	begun	adventure.	Since	the	two	of	them	had	fled	I
decided	to	trespass	their	rooms,	perhaps	I'd	succeed	in	reaching	them	through
that	small	part	of	their	aura	which	they	had	left	behind.	In	the	Youngbloods'
bedroom—a	bright,	cramped,	clean,	and	frugally	furnished	room—there	was	the
scent	of	soap	and	bathrobe,	the	sweetish	warmth	of	the	intelligentsia,	modern,
orderly,	yet	at	the	same	time	smelling	of	nail	clippings,	gas	heaters,	and	pajamas.
I	stood	in	the	center	of	the	room	for	a	long	while,	breathing	in	its	ambience,
examining	its	elements,	and	searching	for	some	distasteful	essence,	something
with	which	to	contaminate	it	all.
On	the	face	of	it	I	couldn't	find	fault	with	anything.	Cleanliness,	order,	sunlight,
thrift,	and	simplicity—and	the	scent	of	cosmetics	was	even	better	than	in	old 
fashioned	bedrooms.	And	I	didn't	know	why	the	modern	engineer's	bathrobe,	his
pajamas,	face	cloth,	shaving	cream,	his	slippers,	his	wife's	Vichy	lozenges	and
rubberized	sports	gear,	the	bright	little	yellow	curtain	in	a	modern	window
pointed	to	something	disgusting.	Standardization	perhaps?	Philistinism?
Bourgeois	narrow mindedness?	No,	that	wasn't	it,	no—then	what?	I	stood	there
unable	to	discover	the	formula	for	my	disgust,	because	there	was	no	word,	no
gesture	or	act	with	which	I	could	catch	that	distasteful	essence	and	call	it	my
own—and	then	my	eyes	fell	on	a	book	lying	open	on	a	bedside	table.	It	was
Chaplin's	memoirs,	opened	to	the	page	on	which	he	tells	how	H.	G.	Wells	had
danced	before	him	a	solo	of	his	own	arrangement.	"...	Then	H.	G.	Wells
magnificently	dances	a	fantastic	dance."	An	English	writer's	solo	dance	helped
me	to	catch	that	distaste,	as	if	on	a	fishing	line.	Here	was	an	appropriate
commentary!	This	room	was	Wells	himself	dancing	solo	for	C	h	a	p	l	i	n.
Because	who	was	Wells	in	his	dance?—a	Utopian.	This	old	modern	man	thought
that	he	was	free	to	express	his	joy	and	to	dance,	he	insisted	on	his	right	to	joy
and	harmony...	he	pranced	with	a	vision	of	the	world	as	it	was	to	be	thousands	of
years	hence,	he	pranced	solo,	overtaking	our	time,	he	danced	conceptually
because	he	thought	he	had	the	right	to	..	.	And	what	was	this	bedroom?—a
Utopia.	Where	was	there	any	room	for	those	gasps	and	moans	that	a	man	lets	out
in	his	sleep?	Where	was	there	room	for	his	better	half's	obesity?	Where	was
there	any	room	for	Youngblood's	beard,	a	beard	actually	shaven	off	but
nonetheless	existing	
in	potential	
After	all,	the	engineer	had	a	beard	even	though
he	threw	it	into	the	sink	every	day	with	the	shaving	cream—and	this	room	was
clean	shaven.	In	times	gone	by,	the	soughing	forest	was	mankind's	bedroom,	butwhere	was	the	room	for	soughs,	for	the	darkness	and	blackness	of	the	forest	in
this	bright	room	amid	the	towels?	How	stingy	was	this	cleanliness—and
cramped—light	blue,	incompatible	with	the	color	of	earth	and	of	a	human	being!
And	the	engineer	and	his	wife	seemed	to	me	just	as	dreadful	in	this	room	as
Wells	in	the	dance	of	his	own	invention	in	front	of	Chaplin.
But	not	until	I	abandoned	myself	to	my	solo	dance—not	until	then	did	my
thoughts	acquire	flesh	and	become	action,	ridiculing	everything	around	me	and
drawing	out	a	foul	taste.	I	danced—and	my	prancing	without	a	partner,	in
emptiness	and	in	silence,	swelled	with	frenzy,	oh,	give	me	courage!	When	I
finished	dancing	around	the	Youngbloods'	towels,	pajamas,	shaving	cream,	beds,
and	sports	gear	I	retreated	quickly,	closing	the	door	behind	me.	I	had	filled	their
modern	interior	with	dancing!	But	onward,	onward,	now	to	the	schoolgirl's
room,	now	dance	and	spoil	everything	there!
But	Miss	Youngblood's	room,	actually	a	parlor	where	she	slept	and	did	her
lessons,	was	infinitely	more	difficult	to	turn	into	something	distasteful.	The	mere
fact	that	the	girl	didn't	have	her	own	room	and	merely	slept	in	the	hallway	gave
off	delightful	and	intoxicating	meanings.	There	was	in	it	the	great	transiency	of
our	century,	the	schoolgirl's	nomadic	life	and	something	like	
carpe	diem	
that
linked	up,	through	mysterious	transfigurations,	with	the	sleek,	automobile 
engendered	nature	of	present day	youth.	One	would	suppose	that	she	falls	asleep
instantly,	as	soon	as	she	lays	her	little	head	(not	just	head;	schoolgirls	had	eyes—
but	they	still	had	"little	heads")	on	her	pillow,	and	this	in	turn	brought	to	mind
the	speed	and	intensity	of	contemporary	life.	Moreover,	in	the	absence	of	a
bedroom,	
sensu	stricto,	
it	was	impossible	for	me	to	do	again	what	I	had	done	in
the	Youngbloods'	bedroom.	The	schoolgirl	actually	slept	in	public,	not	in	private,
she	had	no	private	life	at	night,	and	this	hard	public	life	united	her	with	Europe,
America,	with	Hitler,	Mussolini,	and	Stalin,	with	labor	camps,	flag	waving,
hotels,	railroad	stations,	giving	her	an	immensely	wide	scope,	eliminating	the
need	for	a	room	of	her	own.	Her	bedsheets,	stashed	in	the	hideaway	sofa,	had	an
auxiliary	character,	they	could	at	most	be	an	accessory	to	sleep.	There	was	no
dressing	table.	The	schoolgirl	looked	at	herself	in	a	wall	mirror.	She	had	no	little
hand	mirror.	By	her	sofa	there	was	a	small	black	table,	such	as	any	schoolgirl
might	have,	on	which	lay	books	and	notebooks.	On	the	notebooks—a	nailfile,	on
the	window sill—a	penknife,	a	cheap	pen	for	six	zlotys,	an	apple,	a	sports
program,	photographs	of	Fred	Astaire	and	Ginger	Rogers,	a	pack	of	opium laced
cigarettes,	a	toothbrush,	a	tennis	shoe	with	a	flower	in	it,	a	carnation,	discarded
inadvertently.	And	that	was	all.	How	modest,	yet	how	powerful!I	stopped	by	the	carnation	in	silence—I	couldn't	help	but	admire	the	schoolgirl!
What	skill!	By	tossing	the	flower	into	the	shoe	she	killed	two	partridges	with	one
stone—she	spiced	love	with	sports,	and	she	seasoned	sports	with	love!	She	had
tossed	the	flower	into	a	sweaty	tennis	shoe	rather	than	into	an	ordinary	shoe
because	she	knew	that	flowers	aren't	hurt	by	athlete's	sweat	alone.	By	associating
athletic	sweat	with	the	flower	she	was	imposing	a	favorable	connection	with	her
sweat	in	general,	she	made	it	into	something	flowerlike	and	sporty.	Oh,	masterful
girl!	While	the	old fashioned,	naive,	and	ordinary	girls	grew	azaleas	in
flowerpots,	she	had	tossed	a	flower	into	a	shoe,	and	a	sports	shoe	at	that!	And—
oh,	the	rascal—she	surely	did	it	unconsciously,	inadvertently!
I	wondered	what	to	do	with	this	conundrum!	Should	I	throw	the	flower	into	the
sink?	Stick	it	into	the	bearded	beggar's	trap?	Yet	these	mechanical	and	artificial
measures	would	merely	help	to	circumvent	the	real	difficulty,	no,	the	flower	had
to	be	destroyed	right	where	it	was,	not	by	physical	violence	but	by	psychological
violence.	The	bearded	man,	the	green	twig	in	the	thicket	of	his	beard,	stood	true
and	steadfast	under	the	window,	a	fly	buzzed	on	the	windowpane,	and	from	the
kitchen	came	the	housemaid's	tedious	clamor	as	Kneadus	tried	to	prevail	upon
her	to	be	his	farmhand,	somewhere	in	the	distance	a	streetcar	squealed	around	a
bend	in	the	tracks—I	stood	among	those	strains	and	stresses,	smiling	dubiously
—the	fly	buzzed	louder.	I	caught	it,	tore	off	its	legs	and	wings,	I	turned	it	into	a
suffering,	dolorous,	frightful,	and	metaphysical	little	ball,	not	quite	round,	but
most	definitely	abysmal,	I	placed	it	in	the	flower,	and	softly	lay	both	inside	the
shoe.	The	sweat	that	at	this	moment	covered	my	brow	had	more	power	than	the
flowerlike	tennis shoe	sweat.	It	was	as	if	I	had	set	the	devil	on	the	modern	girl!
The	fly,	through	its	numb	and	dumb	suffering,	vitiated	the	shoe,	the	flower,	the
apple,	the	cigarettes,	the	schoolgirl's	entire	household,	while	I	stood	there	with
an	evil	little	smile,	listening	to	what	was	now	going	on	in	the	room	and	within
me,	studying	the	ambiance,	I	and	a	madman,	we	were	like	two	peas	in	a	pod—
and	I	thought	that	it's	not	only	little	boys	who	drown	cats	and	torture	little	birds,
big	boys	sometimes	also	torture,	just	for	the	sake	of	ceasing	to	be	schoolgirls'
boys,	just	to	get	the	better	of	their	schoolgirl,	yes,	the	schoolgirl!	Wasn't	this	why
Trocki	tortured?	Or	Torquemada?	What	was	the	nature	of	Torquemada's
schoolgirl?	Quietly,	quietly.
The	bearded	man,	decked	in	greenery,	stood	at	his	post—the	fly	suffered	mutely
in	what	was	now	a	Chinese,	a	Byzantine	shoe—my	dance	was	still	taking	place
in	the	Youngbloods'	bedroom—I	now	began	to	rummage	through	the	modern
one's	belongings.	I	reached	into	the	built in	closet	where	she	kept	her	underwear,but	her	underwear	fell	short	of	my	hope.	Her	modern	panties	didn't	bespoil	the
girl,	her	panties	were	just	panties—no	more	domestic	than	sea	shanties.
However,	in	a	drawer	that	I	pried	open	with	a	knife—there	were	stacks	of	letters,
the	schoolgirl's	love	letters!	I	pounced	on	them	while	the	bearded	fellow,	the	fly,
and	the	dance	continued	their	work,	unceasingly.
Oh,	what	pandemonium	in	the	modern	schoolgirl's	life!	What	substance	this
drawer	contained!	Only	then	did	I	realize	what	awesome	mysteries	are	lorded
over	by	contemporary	schoolgirls,	and	what	effect	it	would	have	if	one	of	them
chose	to	reveal	the	secrets	entrusted	to	her.	But,	like	a	stone	cast	in	the	water,
everything	sinks	into	those	girls,	they	are	too	good looking,	too	beautiful	to	tell.
.	.	and	those	who	don't	have	beauty	as	their	handicap	don't	receive	such	letters...
It's	a	wondrous	thing	that	only	those	constrained	by	beauty	have	access	to	certain
essences	of	man's	psychology.	Oh,	a	girl,	that	receptacle	of	shame,	under
beauty's	lock	and	key!	It	was	here,	to	this	sanctuary,	that	man,	whether	young	or
old,	brought	such	things	that,	rather	than	have	publicized,	he	would	probably
prefer	to	die	three	times	and	be	roasted	over	a	slow	fire	.	.	.	And	the	face	of	this
century—the	face	of	the	twentieth	century,	the	century	of	all	centuries	gone	mad,
lurked	ambiguously	like	Silenus	in	the	thicket...
There	were,	among	other	letters,	love	letters	from	pupils	in	our	school,	as
unpleasant,	irritating,	irksome,	awkward,	puerile,	deplorable,	shameful,	and
embarrassing	as	any	ever	beheld	by	History—	either	ancient	or	medieval.	And	if
some	fellow	(of	the	same	age	as	these	pupils)	from	Syria,	Babylon,	Greece,	or
medieval	Poland,	or	even	a	simple	pauper	from	the	time	of	King	Sigismund
Augustus,	ever	read	them,	he'd	certainly	blush,	he	might	even	bash	their	faces.
Oh	what	horrible	cacophonies	they	emitted!	What	falsehoods	rasped	in	their	love
songs!	It	was	as	if	Nature	herself,	in	her	boundless	disdain	for	those	wretches,
for	those	stuffed	coxcombs,	had	silenced	them	in	relation	to	the	Girl,	unwilling
to	let	the	race	of	those	formalists	procreate	and	multiply.	And	only	the	letters	that
out	of	fear	expressed	nothing	were	bearable:	
Zuta	with	Marysia	and	Olek	to	the
tennis	court,	tomorrow,	give	me	a	call,	Heniek.	
Only	those	were	not	degrading	...
I	found	Mizdral's	and	Hopek's	letters,	two	each,	their	contents	vulgar,	their	form
coarse,	and	aspiring	to	maturity	with	incredible	hubris.	They	swarmed	like
moths	to	a	flame,	knowing	full	well	that	they	would	burn	...
Although	the	college	students'	letters	were	no	less	timorous,	their	fear	was	more
deftly	disguised.	One	could	see	how	each	student	trembled	and	suffered	as	he
put	pen	to	paper,	how	watchful	he	was	as	he	weighed	his	words	in	order	not	to
tumble	down	an	incline	straight	into	his	own	immaturity,	down	to	the	calves	ofhis	legs.	That	was	why	I	never	found	any	reference	whatsoever	to	those	calves,
instead	there	was	a	great	deal	about	emotion,	about	public	affairs	and	social
issues,	about	making	a	living,	bridge	playing,	and	horse	racing,	even	about
changing	the	country's	political	system.	Student	politicos	in	particular,	those
loudmouths	from	the	"college	life,"	hid	their	calves	with	the	utmost	skill	and
care	as	they	systematically	sent	the	schoolgirl	their	programs,	appeals,	and
ideological	declarations.	
Dear	Miss	Zuta,	perhaps	you	would	like	to	become
acquainted	with	our	program—they	
wrote,	but	in	those	programs	there	was
nothing	clearly	stated	about	the	calves	of	their	legs	either,	unless	occasionally
there	was	a	
lapsus	linguae	
when,	for	example,	instead	of	"onward,	don't	lag
behind,"	they	wrote	"onward,	don't	leg	behind."	Also	some	citizens	from	the
town	of	Lemno	made	a	typo,	and	instead	of	"we—	Leninites"	wrote	"we—
Legnites."	Aside	from	these	two	instances,	the	calves	of	their	legs	never	made
any	appearance.	Similarly	in	magazines,	which	were	otherwise	rather	lascivious
and	with	the	help	of	which	old	aunts,	writing	articles	for	the	press	on	the	subject
of	"the	jazzband	era,"	tried	to	bond	spiritually	with	the	schoolgirl	and	to	restrain
her	on	her	downward	course	to	ruin,	the	calves	were	very	strictly	camouflaged.
When	reading	all	this,	one	had	the	impression	that	it	had	nothing	to	do	with	the
calves	of	legs.
Furthermore—whole	stacks	of	those	minor	and	now	commonplace	little	volumes
of	verse,	no	fewer	than	three	or	four	hundred,	lay	scattered	about	at	the	bottom
of	the	drawer,	and	actually—one	had	to	admit—were	neither	opened	nor	read	by
the	said	schoolgirl.	They	were	furnished	with	dedications	in	a	personal	tone,
upright,	sincere,	honest,	that	exhorted	the	girl	most	vigorously	to	read	their
poems,	compelled	her	to	read	them,	censured	her	in	most	elaborate	and
murderous	phrases	for	not	reading	them,	while	others	extolled	and	praised	her	to
high	heaven	for	reading	them	or	threatened	to	exclude	her	from	cultural	society
for	not	reading	them	and	demanded	that	she	read	them	for	the	sake	of	the	poet's
loneliness,	the	poet's	work,	the	poet's	mission,	the	poet's	role,	the	poet's
suffering,	the	poet's	originality,	the	poet's	calling,	and	even	for	the	sake	of	the
poet's	soul.	Strangely	enough,	even	in	this	context	there	was	no	mention	of	the
calves	of	legs.	And	stranger	still,	there	wasn't	an	ounce	of	calves	in	the	titles	of
these	little	collections.	Only	Pale	Dawns	and	Dawning	Dawns,	and	New	Dawns,
and	New	Dawning,	and	Era	of	Struggle,	and	Struggle	in	the	Era,	and
Troublesome	Era,	and	Young	Era,	and	Youth	on	the	Watch,	and	Youth's
Watchfulness,	and	Struggling	Youth,	and	Youth	Advancing,	and	Youth	at	a
Standstill,	and	Hey,	the	Young!	and	Bitterness	of	Youth,	and	Eyes	of	Youth,	andLips	of	Youth,	and	Young	Springtime,	and	My	Springtime,	and	Springtime	and	I,
and	Springtime	Rhythms,	and	Machine gun	Rhythm,	and	Fire	a	Salute,	and
Semaphores,	and	Antennae,	Propellers	and	My	Kiss,	and	My	Precious,	and	My
Yearnings,	and	My	Eyes,	and	My	Lips	(not	a	whit	about	calves	of	legs
anywhere),	and	everything	was	written	in	a	poetic	tone,	in	delicate	assonance,	or
without	delicate	assonance	and	in	bold	metaphors,	or	else	with	a	subterranean
melody	of	words.	And	yet,	almost	nothing	about	calves,	or	very	little,
disproportionately	very	little.	The	authors	deftly	and	with	great	poetic	skill	hid
behind	Beauty,	Perfection	of	Craft,	behind	Inner	Logic	of	Composition;	behind
Ironclad	Sequence	of	Associations,	or	behind	Awareness	of	Social	Class,
Struggle,	Dawning	of	History,	and	other	similar,	objective,	anti leg	matters.	But
it	was	clearly	visible	at	the	outset	that	the	little	poems,	in	their	convoluted,
forced,	and	useless	art,	were	nothing	but	a	complicated	code,	and	that	there	must
have	been	a	real	and	not	a	trifling	reason	which	made	those	numerous,	scrawny,
minor league	dreamers	compose	such	odd	charades.	Therefore,	after	a	moment's
profound	reflection,	I	managed	to	translate	the	substance	of	the	following	stanza
into	comprehensible	language:
The	Poem	Horizons	burst	like	flasks	a	green	blotch	swells	high	in	the	clouds	I
move	back	to	the	shadow	of	the	pine—	and	there:	with	greedy	gulps	I	drink	my
diurnal	springtime	My	Translation	Calves	of	legs,	calves,	calves	Calves	of	legs,
calves,	calves,	calves	Calves	of	legs,	calves,	calves,	calves,	calves—	The	calf	of
my	leg:	the	calf	of	my	leg,	calf,	calf,	calves,	calves,	calves.
Furthermore—it	was	here	that	the	schoolgirl's	real	pandemonium	began:	behind
these	letters	there	was	a	heap	of	confidential	letters	from	judges,	attorneys,
public	prosecutors,	pharmacists,	businessmen,	urban	and	rural	citizens,	doctors
and	such—from	those	high	and	mighty	who	had	always	impressed	me	so!	I
stood	there	astonished	while	the	fly	suffered	in	silence.	Did	these	men,	pretense
notwithstanding,	socialize	with	the	schoolgirl?	"Unbelievable,"	I	went	on
repeating,	"unbelievable!"	Were	they	so	oppressed	by	their	Maturity	that,
unbeknownst	to	their	wives	and	children,	they	had	to	send	long	letters	to	a
modern	schoolgirl?	And	here,	of	course,	there	was	even	less	about	calves	of	legs,
on	the	contrary,	each	one	of	them	explained	in	detail	his	reasons	for	the
"exchange	of	thoughts,"	that	he	felt	that	"Miss	Zuta"	would	understand	him,	that
she	wouldn't	misconstrue	etc.,	
etc.
	They	then	went	on	and	paid	homage	to	the
modern	one	in	words	that	were	long winded	yet	servile,	imploring	her,	in
between	the	lines,	to	deign	dream	about	them,	in	secret,	of	course.	And	each	one,
not	mentioning	the	calves	of	his	legs,	not	even	once,	underlined	and	emphasizedto	the	utmost	his	modern	boyishness.
A	public	prosecutor:
Even	though	gowned,	I	am	nothing	but	a	messenger	boy.	I	am	well	disciplined.	I
do	as	I'm	told.	I	have	no	opinions	of	my	own.	It's	the	chief	justice's	prerogative	to
rebuke	me.	He	recently	called	me	an	ignoramus.
A	politico	was	assuring	her:
I'm	a	just	a	boy,	a	purely	political	boy,	a	history making	boy.
A	noncommissioned	officer	with	an	exceptionally	sensuous	and	lyrical	soul
wrote	as	follows:
I	am	bound	by	blind	obedience.	I	must	lay	down	my	life	on	command.	I'm	a
slave.	Indeed—our	leaders	call	us	"boys,"	regardless	of	our	age.	Don't	believe
my	birth	certificate,	that's	a	purely	extraneous	detail,	my	wife	and	children	are
mere	appendages,	I	am	no	knight	in	shining	armor,	just	a	military	boy,	with	a
boy's	blind	and	faithful	soul,	and	in	the	barracks	I'm	just	a	dog,	a	dog!
A	landowning	citizen:
I've	gone	bankrupt,	my	wife	has	taken	on	housecleaning,	my	children	have	gone
to	the	dogs—I'm	no	citizen,	I'm	a	boy	in	exile.	Secretly,	I'm	in	a	state	of	bliss.
Nevertheless,	calves	of	legs	were	not	mentioned	
en	toutes	lettres,	
not	even	once.
In	their	postscripts	they	begged	the	schoolgirl	for	secrecy,	pointing	out	that	their
careers	would	be	ruined	forever	if	a	single	word	of	these	confidences	were	to
become	public.
This	is	for	You	alone.	Keep	it	to	yourself.	Don't	tell	anyone!
Unbelievable!	These	letters	made	me	finally	realize	the	extent	of	the	modern
schoolgirl's	power.	Where	wasn't	it	present?	Inside	whose	head	were	the	calves
of	her	legs	not	stuck?	And,	as	I	thought	about	it	all,	my	legs	also	trembled,	and	I
would	have	danced	in	honor	of	those	aging	Boys	of	the	twentieth	century	who
had	been	drilled	and	driven,	egged	on	and	flogged	with	a	whip,	when	suddenly,
at	the	bottom	of	the	drawer,	I	noticed	a	large	envelope	from	the	school
superintendent's	office,	addressed	quite	obviously	in	Pimko's	handwriting!	The
letter	was	dry	and	blunt.
I	will	no	longer	tolerate,	
Pimko	wrote,	
your	disregard	and	outrageous	ignorance
of	matters	pertaining	to	the	school	curriculum.
I	summon	you	to	present	yourself	in	my	study—at	the	superintendent's	office,	the
day	after	tomorrow,	Friday	at	4:30	p.m.,	the	objective	being	explanation,
lecturing	and	tutoring	you	on	Norwid,	to	fill	this	gap	in	your	education.Please	note	that	I	am	summoning	you	legally,	formally,	officially,	and	with	all
due	civility,	as	your	professor	and	educator,	but,	in	case	of	any	recalcitrance	on
your	part,	I	shall	write	a	letter	to	the	dean	of	girls	suggesting	your	dismissal
from	school.
I	wish	to	point	out	that	I	can	no	longer	tolerate	thersaid	gap	and,	as	your
Professor,	I	have	a	right	not	to.	Please	comply.	T.	Pimko,	Ph.D.	and	Professor
Honoris	Causa	Warsaw...
So	that's	how	far	it	has	gone	between	them?	He	was	threatening	her,	was	he?
Really?	She	had	wooed	and	courted	him	with	her	ignorance	until	she	forced	the
prof	to	show	his	claws.	Pimko,	unable	to	make	a	date	with	the	schoolgirl	as
Pimko,	was	summoning	her	in	his	capacity	as	professor	of	middle	and	higher
education.	He	was	no	longer	satisfied	with	frolicking	with	her	only	in	her	home,
under	her	parents'	eyes—he	was	now	taking	advantage	of	the	authority	of	his
status,	he	wanted	to	force	Norwid	on	the	girl	by	entirely	legitimate	means.	Since
he	could	not	do	it	in	any	other	way,	he	was	going	to	use	Norwid	so	that	he	could
play	a	prominent	part	in	her	life.	I	was	astonished	as	I	held	his	letter	in	my	hand,
I	stood	over	the	pile	of	papers	not	knowing	whether	the	revelation	was,	for	me,
bad	news	or	good.	However,	under	his	letter	there	was	in	the	drawer	yet	another
sheet	of	paper—torn	out	of	a	notebook,	a	few	sentences	in	pencil—	and	I
recognized	Kopyrda's	handwriting!	Yes,	it	was	Kopyrda's,	no	doubt	about	it,	it
was	Kopyrda's,	no	one	else's!	I	feverishly	grabbed	the	note.	It	was	concise,
crumpled	up,	careless—which	meant	that	it	had	been	tossed	through	the	window.
I	forgot	to	give	you	my	address	
(here	followed	Kopyrda's	address).	
If	you	want
me,	I	want	you	too.	Let	me	know.	H.	K.
Kopyrda!	Remember	Kopyrda?	Oh,	I	instantly	understood	it	all!	My	hunch	had
been	right!	Kopyrda	was	the	strange	boy	who	had	accosted	the	schoolgirl,	he
was	the	subject	of	conversation	at	lunchtime!	Kopyrda	had	tossed	the	note
through	her	window	as	he	passed	by	a	little	while	ago.	He	had	accosted	the	girl
in	the	street,	and	now,	lo	and	behold,	he	was	enlarging	on	his	proposition—how
daring,	and	modern	at	that!	"If	you	want	me,	I	want	you	too"—he	went	straight
to	the	point,	propositioning	her	tersely,	matter of factly...	He	saw	her	in	the
street,	was	drawn	to	her	sexually	and	...	he	started	talking	to	her—and	now	he
tossed	in	the	note	as	he	passed	under	her	window,	not	standing	on	ceremony,
according	to	youth's	new	customs	.	.	.	Kopyrda!	And	she—she	didn't	even	know
his	last	name,	because	he	hadn't	introduced	himself	to	her...
Something	caught	me	by	the	throat.And	there	was	also	Pimko,	old	Pimko,	who,	like	a	true	gentleman,	was	openly,
legally,	formally,	and	officially	coercing	her	with	his	professorship.	"You	must,
you	must	satisfy	me	through	Norwid,	because	I	am	your	lord	and	master,	your
Professor,	you	are	my	slave—you,	a	schoolgirl!	..."	The	other	one	had	the	right
to	her	as	her	modern	brother	and	her	contemporary,	while	this	one	had	his	right
as	an	educator	at	the	high school	level,	a	licensed	pedagogue...
Something	caught	me	by	the	throat	again.	All	the	confessions	of	the	citizens,	the
attorneys'	moans,	and	the	ridiculous,	poetic	charades	were	nothing	in	the	face	of
these	two	letters.	These	two	were	the	harbingers	of	calamity	and	defeat.	The
threat,	the	real	danger	was	that	the	girl	was	about	to	submit	to	Pimko	and	to
Kopyrda	without	any	feelings,	on	the	strength	of	custom	alone,	just	because	they
each	had	a	right—modern	and	private	in	one	case,	old fashioned	and	public	in
the	other.	Yet	this	intensified	her	charm	immensely...	and	neither	my	dancing	nor
my	working	on	the	fly	would	have	saved	me,	she	would	have	choked	me	with
her	charms.	What	if	she	lets	Kopyrda	lay	her—calmly,	unsentimentally,
physically,	in	the	modern	way...	Or	what	if,	obeying	the	prof's	orders,	she	goes	to
Pimko	...	Is	she	the	kind	of	girl	who	goes	to	an	old	man	just	because	she's	a
schoolgirl?...	Is	she	the	kind	of	girl	who	goes	to	bed	with	a	young	man	just
because	she's	modern?...
Oh,	this	cult,	this	obedience,	the	girl's	slavery	just	because	she	is	a	schoolgirl	and
because	she's	modern!	Addressing	her	so	harshly	and	tersely	they	both	knew
what	they	were	doing,	they	knew	that	the	girl	would,	for	this	very	r	e	a	s	o	n,	be
ready	to	accede	.	.	.	The	experienced	Pimko	surely	did	not	expect	her	to	be
scared	by	his	threats,	on	the	contrary—he	counted	on	her	being	charmed	by	the
idea	of	submitting,	under	duress,	to	an	old	man—almost	as	charming	as
submitting	to	a	young	man	simply	because	he	spoke	to	her	in	a	modern	tongue.
Oh,	this	was	slavery	to	the	point	of	self effacement	for	the	sake	of	style,	what
obedience	on	the	girl's	part!	I	knew	that	the	unavoidable	was	about	to	happen	.	.	.
And	then	.	.	.	what	would	I	do,	where	would	I	take	shelter	.	.	.	how	would	I
protect	myself	.	.	.	against	this	incoming	tide	and	freshet?	Yet	note	how	strange	it
all	was.	They	were	both	actually	destroying	the	Youngblood	girl's	modern
charms:	Pimko	wanted	to	annihilate	her	sporty	ignorance	of	poetry,	and	in
Kopyrda's	case—worse	still,	it	could	end	up	with—mommy.	Yet	the	actual
moment	of	her	(possibly)	being	destroyed	enhanced	her	charms	a	hundredfold.
Why	had	I	looked	in	her	drawer?	Ignorance	is	bliss.	If	only	I	had	remained
ignorant—I	could	have	continued	my	activity	against	the	schoolgirl	as	planned.
But	now	I	knew	it	all—and	this	weakened	me	terribly.These	were	the	penetrating,	piercing	secrets	of	the	seventeen year old's	private
life,	the	demonic	contents	of	the	schoolgirl's	drawer.	Poetry...	How	to
contaminate	it?	How	to	spoil	it	for	oneself?	The	fly	continued	to	suffer,
immobile,	voiceless.	The	bearded	man	continued	to	chew	the	twig.	Holding
these	letters	in	my	hand,	I	wondered	what	course	of	action	to	take,	what	to	do
next,	how	was	I	to	cope	with	the	inevitable	yet	frightful	surge	of	charm,	beauty,
enchantment,	longing...
Finally,	in	all	my	madness,	an	idea	for	a	plot	dawned	on	me—it	was	so	bizarre
that	until	I	began	to	carry	it	out,	it	seemed	unreal.	I	tore	a	sheet	out	of	a
notebook.	I	took	a	pencil	and,	in	the	Youngblood	girl's	clear,	sprawling
handwriting,	I	wrote:
Tomorrow,	Thursday,	at	12	midnight,	knock	on	the	verandah	window,	I'll	let	you
in.	Z.
I	placed	it	in	an	envelope.	I	addressed	it	to	Kopyrda.	And	I	wrote	a	second,
identical	letter:
Tomorrow,	Thursday,	after	12	midnight,	knock	on	the	verandah	window,	I'll	let
you	in.	Z.
I	addressed	it	to	Pimko.	The	plan	was	this:	Pimko,	having	received	such	a	terse,
informal	little	note	in	response	to	his	professorial	letter,	will	lose	his	head.	It	will
be	like	a	knock	on	the	old	man's	head.	He'll	imagine	that	the	schoolgirl	wants	to
have	a	
sensu	stricto	
date	with	him.	The	sheer	audacity,	cynicism,	moral
depravity,	demonic	quality	of	it	all—considering	his	age,	social	class,	and
upbringing—will	intoxicate	him	like	hashish.	He	won't	be	able	to	maintain	his
role	as	a	professor—he	won't	be	able	to	persist	in	his	legality	and	openness.
Secretly	and	illegally	he'll	make	haste	to	the	window,	and	he'll	knock.	He	will
then	run	into	Kopyrda.
What	then?	I	didn't	know.	But	I	knew	that	I'd	scream,	wake	up	the	family,	drag
the	whole	matter	into	the	open,	that	by	using	Kopyrda	I	would	ridicule	Pimko,
and	by	using	Pimko	I	would	ridicule	Kopyrda—we	would	then	see	what	the
wooing	would	look	like	out	in	the	open,	what	would	then	be	left	of	those
charms!10	Legs	on	the	Loose	and	New	Entrapment
Next	morning,	after	a	stormy	night	tormented	by	dreams,	I	jumped	out	of	bed	at
the	crack	of	dawn.	Not	to	school,	however.	I	hid	behind	a	coat	rack	in	a	small
vestibule	that	separated	the	kitchen	from	the	bathroom.	Following	a	relentless
call	to	battle,	I	decided	to	attack	the	Youngbloods	psychologically,	in	the
bathroom.	Hail,	pupa!	Hail,	queen!	I	needed	to	muster	all	my	resources	and
energize	my	spirit	for	the	final	encounter	with	Pimko	and	with	Kopyrda.	I
trembled,	sweating—yet	a	struggle	for	life	and	death	cannot	choose	its	means,	I
could	not	afford	to	lose	my	trump	card.	Catch	your	enemy	in	the	bathroom.	Look
at	him	and	see	what	he's	like	then!	Look	him	over	and	remember	him!	When	his
attire	falls	off,	and	with	it,	like	an	autumn	leaf,	all	his	glitter	and	pretense	of	chic,
swank,	and	pizzazz,	your	spirit	can	pounce	on	him	like	a	lion	pounces	on	a	lamb.
You	mustn't	overlook	anything	that	might	arouse	and	energize	you,	thus	enabling
you	to	overpower	the	enemy,	the	goal	sanctifies	the	means,	so	fight,	fight,	fight
above	all,	fight	using	the	latest	methods	available,	nothing	but	fight!	That's	what
the	wisdom	of	nations	has	always	proclaimed.	The	entire	household	was	asleep
as	I	lay	in	wait.	No	murmurs	came	from	the	inhumanly,	more	than	inhumanly
bestial...	Now	or	never,	nab	her	right	out	of	sleep,	while	she's	still	warm	and
untidy,	disheveled,	I'll	destroy	her	beauty	within	me,	her	cheap,	schoolgirl
charms!	We'll	see	whether	Kopyrda	or	Pimko	can	save	her	from	annihilation!
She	walked	whisding,	she	looked	funny	in	her	pajamas,	a	towel	round	her	neck
—all	with	a	quick,	precise	motion,	all	action.	One	moment	and	she	was	in	the
bathroom,	and	I	pounced	on	her	with	my	eyes	from	my	hiding	place.	Now,	now
or	never,	now,	when	she's	her	weakest,	her	most	sloppy	self	!—but	she	was	so
quick	that	no	sloppi ness	could	cling	fast	to	her.	She	stepped	into	the	bathtub—
turned	on	the	cold	shower.	She	shook	her	curls,	her	well proportioned	nudity
trembled,	ducking	and	splashing	in	the	stream	of	water.	Ha!	So	it	wasn't	I	who
caught	her,	it	was	she	who	caught	me	by	the	throat!	The	girl,	unforced	by
anyone,	first	thing	in	the	morning,	before	breakfast,	took	a	cold	shower	and
subjected	her	body	to	spasms	and	twitches	so	that	she	could,	with	a	youthful
splashing	on	an	empty	stomach,	regain	her	daytime	beauty!
In	spite	of	myself	I	had	to	admire	the	discipline	that	was	involved	in	the	girl's
good	looks!	With	all	swiftness,	precision,	and	dexterity	she	managed	to	dodge
that	most	difficult	transition—between	night	and	day—and	she	floated	like	a
butterfly	on	motion's	wings.	And	if	that	weren't	enough—she	subjected	her	body
to	cold	water,	to	a	sharp	and	youthful	splashing,	instinctively	sensing	that	a	doseof	sharpness	would	annihilate	anything	slovenly.	When	all	is	said	and	done—
what	could	harm	a	girl	vigorously	puffing	in	cold	water?	When	she	turned	off
the	faucet	and	stood	naked,	dripping	with	water,	panting,	she	began	as	if	anew,
as	if	the	other	had	never	been.	Hey!—if	instead	of	cold	water	she	had	used	soap
and	warm	water,	it	would	have	served	no	purpose.	Only	cold	water	could,	by
gushing,	force	oblivion.
I	crept	out	of	the	vestibule	like	a	sleaze.	I	dragged	my	despicable	self	back	to	my
room,	convinced	that	further	peeping	would	accomplish	nothing,	on	the	contrary,
it	might	prove	disastrous.	Damn	it,	damn—
yet	another	defeat,	at	the	very	bottom	of	intelligentsia	hell	I	was	still	suffering
defeat.	Biting	my	fingers	until	they	bled,	I	swore	to	deny	the	Youngbloods
victory,	to	go	on	driving	and	energizing	myself,	and	I	wrote	in	pencil	on	the
bathroom	wall:	
Veni,	vidi,	vici.	
Let	them	know	I	had	seen	them,	let	them	feel	that
they've	been	seen!	Their	enemy	is	not	asleep,	he	lies	in	ambush.	Energize,
vitalize!	I	went	to	school,	nothing	new	there,	Ashface,	the	bard,	Mizdral,	Hopek
and	
accusa tivus	cum	infinitivo,	
Galkiewicz,	faces,	mugs,	pupas,	the	toe	in	my
shoe,	and	the	daily	universal	impotence,	boring,	boring,	boring!	As	I	had
expected,	my	letter	left	no	mark	on	Kopyrda's	face,	he	seemed	to	wiggle	his	legs
a	little	more,	but	I	wasn't	sure,	I	could	have	been	imagining	it.	My	schoolmates,
however,	looked	at	me	in	disgust,	Kneadus	even	asked:
"For	God's	sake,	what	sort	of	a	mess	have	you	got	yourself	into?"	Indeed,	after
all	this	dynamizing	and	energizing,	my	mug	became	so	dumb	that	I	didn't	really
know	which	end	was	up,	but	never	mind,	forget	it,	soon	it	would	be	night,	it	was
the	night	that	mattered	most,	I	awaited	the	night	in	trembling,	the	night	would
settle	it	all,	the	night	would	decide.	Perhaps	the	night	would	bring	a	turning
point.	Will	Pimko	yield	to	the	temptation?	Will	the	seasoned,	double barreled
prof	be	thrown	off	balance	by	the	girl's	sensuous	letter?	Everything	depended	on
it.	Let	Pimko	lose	his	balance,	I	prayed,	lose	his	head,	but	suddenly,	terrified	by
the	mug,	the	pupa,	by	my	letter,	by	Pimko,	by	what	had	been	and	what	was	yet
to	be,	I	tried	to	make	a	run	for	it,	I	kept	jumping	to	my	feet	in	the	classroom,	like
a	complete	idiot—then	I	sat	down	again—because	where	would	I	run,	backward,
forward,	to	the	left	or	right,	from	my	own	mug,	from	my	own	pupa?	Shut	up,
shut	up,	there's	no	escape!	The	night	will	decide.
During	lunch	nothing	noteworthy	happened.	The	schoolgirl	and	Mrs.	Engineer
were	tight lipped,	not	throwing	about	their	modernity,	as	they	usually	did.	They
were	scared.	They	must	have	felt	my	energy	and	vitality.	I	noticed	that	the
Youngblood	woman	sat	stiffly	in	her	chair,	with	the	dignity	of	someone	whosesitting	was	under	surveillance,	funny,	this	gave	her	a	matronly	air,	I	had	not
expected	this	effect.	In	any	case	there	was	no	doubt	that	she	had	read	my
inscription	on	the	wall.	I	watched	her	keenly,	and	I	made	the	remark,	in	a
miserable,	sleazy,	and	detached	tone,	that	I	was	noted	for	an	exceptionally	sharp
and	piercing	vision,	which	is	able	to	go	right	through	a	face	and	exit	on	the	other
side	.	.	.	She	pretended	not	to	hear	me,	while	the	engineer	burst	into	giggles	in
spite	of	himself,	and	he	went	on	giggling	for	a	long	time,	mechanically.	As	a
result	of	recent	events	Mr.	Younblood	manifested—if	my	eyes	did	not	mislead
me—a	tendency	to	messiness,	he	spread	butter	on	large	slices	of	bread	and	stuck
huge	pieces	into	his	mouth,	making	smacking	noises	as	he	chewed.
After	lunch	I	tried	peeping	at	the	schoolgirl	from	four	until	six	o'clock—to	no
avail,	however,	because	not	once	did	she	come	into	the	perimeter	of	my	vision.
She	must	have	been	on	her	guard.	I	also	noticed	that	the	Youngblood	woman
was	spying	on	me,	because	she	walked	into	my	room	several	times	with	some
lame	excuse,	she	even	suggested,	rather	artlessly,	that	she	would	treat	me	to	the
movies.	Their	anxiety	grew,	they	felt	threatened,	they	scented	enemy	and	danger,
although	they	didn't	know	what	was	threatening	them,	nor	what	I	was	up	to—
they	caught	the	scent	and	were	demoralized	by	it,	its	shapelessness	provoked
anxiety	that,	in	turn,	gave	them	nothing	concrete	to	hold	on	to.	And	they	couldn't
even	talk	among	themselves	about	the	danger,	because	their	words	sank	into	a
shapeless	and	ill defined	darkness.	Groping	her	way,	Mrs.	Engineer	tried	to
organize	some	sort	of	defense,	and,	as	I	found	out,	she	spent	the	whole	afternoon
reading	Bertrand	Russell	and	gave	her	husband	Wells	to	read.	But	Mr.
Youngblood	declared	that	he	preferred	reading	the	yearbook	of	"The	Warsaw
Figaro"	and	Boy	Zelenski's	
Words,	
and	from	time	to	time	I	heard	him	burst	out
laughing.	All	in	all,	they	couldn't	setde	down.	Finally,	Mrs.	Youngblood	decided
to	busy	herself	with	household	bills,	thus	retreating	to	the	solid	ground	of	fiscal
realism,	while	the	engineer	hung	around	the	house,	sat	down	on	one	piece	of
furniture,	then	on	another,	all	the	while	humming	rather	frivolous	tunes.	It
bothered	them	that	I	sat	in	my	room,	not	showing	any	signs	of	life.	I	therefore
tried	all	the	more	to	keep	silent.	Quiet,	quiet,	quiet,	every	so	often	the	silence
mounted	in	intensity	and	the	buzzing	of	a	fly	sounded	like	the	blowing	of	a	horn,
shapelessness	seeped	into	the	silence,	creating	murky	swamps.	Around	seven
o'clock	I	saw	Kneadus	slipping	between	the	fence	posts	toward	the	housemaid,
signaling	in	the	direction	of	the	kitchen	window.
By	evening,	Mrs.	Engineer	also	began	flitting	from	one	chair	to	another,	and	the
engineer	had	a	few	nips	in	the	pantry.	They	couldn't	find	the	right	form	nor	spacefor	themselves,	they	couldn't	sit	still,	they	kept	sitting	down	and	jumping	back
up	as	if	prodded	with	a	hot	poker,	and	they	walked	hither	and	thither	tense	and
wrought	up,	as	if	pursued	from	behind.	Their	reality,	under	the	powerful	stimulus
of	my	action,	was	swept	off	its	course,	it	bubbled	and	spilled	over,	roared	and
groaned	numbly,	while	the	dark,	absurd	elements	of	ugliness,	of	disgust	and
sordidness	became	more	and	more	tangible	and	grew	on	their	rising	anxiety	as	if
on	yeast.	Mrs.	Engineer	could	hardly	sit	at	dinner,	all	her	concentration	having
gone	into	her	face	and	upper	regions,	while	Mr.	Youngblood,	on	the	contrary,
came	to	the	table	wearing	just	his	vest	without	a	jacket,	he	tucked	the	napkin
under	his	chin	and,	buttering	thick	slices	of	bread	that	he	had	gnawed	off,	he	told
quasi intellectual	jokes	and	giggled.	The	awareness	that	he	had	been	spied	upon
tumbled	him	into	vulgar	infantilism,	he	totally	attuned	to	what	I	saw	in	him,	he
became	a	petty,	coquettish,	amused	little	engineer—a	jolly,	cuddlesome,	spoiled
little	engineer.	He	also	kept	winking	at	me	and	sending	me	witty,	knowing	little
signals	to	which—of	course—I	didn't	respond,	and	I	sat	looking	pale	and
miserable.	The	girl	sat	tight lipped,	indifferent,	she	ignored	everything	with	truly
girlish	heroism,	one	could	swear	she	knew	nothing—oh,	I	was	frightened	as	I
watched	that	heroism,	which	only	enhanced	her	beauty!	But	night	will	give	the
verdict,	night	will	decide,	and	if	both	Pimko	and	Kopyrda	default,	the	modern
girl	will	most	certainly	be	victorious,	and	nothing	will	save	me	from	slavery.
Night	was	coming,	and	with	it	the	decisive	encounter.	I	couldn't	foresee	what
would	happen,	there	was	no	set	program,	all	I	knew	was	that	I	had	to	act	in
unison	with	each	disfiguring,	absurd,	murky,	grotesque,	and	disharmonious
element	that	would	emerge,	with	each	destructive	component—and	I	was
steeped	in	a	rancid,	sickly	terror,	compared	to	which	the	powerful	fear	of	being
murdered	is	a	mere	trifle.	After	eleven	o'clock	the	schoolgirl	went	to	bed.	Earlier
in	the	day	I	had	used	a	chisel	to	widen	the	angle	of	sight	through	the	slit	in	the
door,	and	now	I	could	see	that	part	of	the	room	which,	so	far,	had	been
inaccessible	to	my	vision.	She	quickly	undressed	and	turned	off	the	light,	but
instead	of	going	to	sleep	she	tossed	and	turned	on	the	hard	mattress.	She	lit	a
lamp,	picked	up	an	English	crime	novel	from	her	bedside	table,	and	I	could	tell
that	she	was	forcing	herself	to	read.	The	modern	one	looked	attentively	into
space	as	if	visually	trying	to	decipher	the	danger,	to	guess	its	shape	and	see	at
last	the	configuration	of	horror,	to	realistically	understand	what	was	brewing
against	her.	She	didn't	know	that	the	danger	had	neither	shape	nor	sense 
senseless,	shapeless,	and	lawless,	a	murky,	jumbled up,	elemental	force	devoid
of	style	was	endangering	her	modern	shape,	and	that	was	all.I	heard	raised	voices	coming	from	Mr.	and	Mrs.	Engineer's	bedroom.	I	quickly
ran	to	their	door.	The	engineer,	in	his	underwear,	all	a giggle,	cabaret style,	was
again	telling	anecdotes	aimed	at	having	the	distinct	flavor	of	the	intelligentsia.
"That's	enough!"	The	Youngblood	woman	rubbed	her	hands.	"Enough,	enough!
Stop	it!"
"Wait,	wait,	Joannie—just	a	little	more	...	I'll	soon	stop!"
"I'm	no	Joannie.	I	am	Joanna.	Take	off	those	underpants,	or	put	on	your	pants."
"Panties!"
"Shut	up!"
"Panties,	shmanties,	hee,	hee,	hee,	panties!"
"Shut	up,	I	tell	you..."
"Panties,	pants	..."
"Shut	up!"	she	abruptly	switched	off	the	lamp.
"Switch	it	on,	old	girl!"
"I'm	no	old	girl...	I	can't	bear	to	look	at	you!	Why	did	I	ever	fall	in	love	with
you?	What's	the	matter	with	you?	What's	the	matter	with	us?	Get	hold	of
yourself.	We're	surely	marching	together	to	the	New	Days	ahead!	We	are	the
champions	of	Modern	Times!"
"Sure,	sure,	you	fat	fish—hee,	hee,	hee—you're	my	dish.	Fatty,	creamy,	yet	so
dreamy.	But	his	heart	has	ceased	to	thump,	'cause	she's	turned	into	a	frump	..	."
{9}
"What's	this?	Victor!	What	are	you	saying?"
"Vicky	is	so	cheery!	Vicky's	having	fun!	Vicky	frisks	at	a	trot!"
"What	are	you	saying,	Victor?	The	death	penalty!"	she	exclaimed,	"the	death
penalty!	Our	Era!	Culture	and	progress!	Our	aspirations!	Our	transports!	Victor!
oh,	not	so	fatty,	not	so	racy,	not	so	diminutive	either	.	.	.	What	has	entangled
you?	Zuta?	Oh,	this	is	so	hard!	Something's	wrong!	Something	fateful	is	in	the
air!	Treachery..."
"Treachy reachy rie,"	Mr.	Youngblood	said.
"Victor!	Stop	using	diminutives!	Stop	it!"
"Treachy letchy rie,	Vicky	says	..."
"Victor!"
They	broke	into	a	free for all!
"The	light,"	the	Youngblood	woman	panted,	"Victor!	The	light!	Switch	it	on!	Let
go	of	me!"
"Wait!"	he	panted	and	giggled,	"wait,	let	me	smack	you,	let	me	give	you	a	smackin	the	scruff	of	your	neckie!"
"Never!	Let	go,	or	I'll	bite	you!"
"I'll	smack	you,	smack	you	in	the	little	scruff	of	your	neckie,	your	scruffie,	your
little	scruffie	..."
And	he	suddenly	spat	out	all	the	bedroom	love	diminutives,	beginning	with
sweetie pie	all	the	way	to	little	pussy	...	I	retreated	in	fear.	Even	though	I	lacked
none	of	my	own	disgusting	jargon,	I	couldn't	bear	this.	The	hellish	belittlement
that	had	so	powerfully	affected	my	fate	was	now	making	their	life	miserable.
This	was	the	little	engineer's	devilish	excess,	oh,	it's	horrible	when	a	petty
engineer	takes	the	bit	between	his	teeth,	what	are	these	times	we	live	in?	I	heard
a	smack.	Did	he	hit	her	in	her	little	scruffie	or	slap	her	in	the	face?
It	was	dark	in	the	girl's	room.	Was	she	asleep?	All	was	quiet	in	her	room,	and	I
imagined	her	sleeping	with	her	arm	over	her	head,	halfway	under	the	covers,	all
worn	out.	Suddenly	she	groaned.	She	groaned	but	not	in	her	sleep.	She	moved
abruptly,	anxiously	on	her	couch.	I	knew	she	was	huddling	up	and	that	her	wide 
open	eyes	were	fearfully	searching	in	the	darkness.	Had	the	modern	schoolgirl
become	so	sensitized	that	my	gaze	could	strike	her	in	the	darkness	through	the
keyhole?	Her	groan	was	incredibly	beautiful,	torn	out	of	the	depths	of	night—as
if	the	girl's	ill boding	fate	itself	had	groaned,	calling	for	help	in	vain.
I	heard	her	groan	again,	numbly,	desperately.	Had	she	sensed	that	at	this	very
moment	her	father,	depraved	by	me,	was	smacking	her	mother?	Had	she	become
aware	of	the	odiousness	that	was	besetting	her	on	all	sides?	I	thought	I	saw	her
in	the	semi darkness,	wringing	her	hands	and	gnawing	on	her	forearm	until	it
hurt.	As	if	she	wanted	to	grab	with	her	teeth	the	beauty	within.	The	depravity
surrounding	her	and	lurking	from	all	corners	excited	her	charms.	What	treasures,
what	charms	she	possessed!	The	first	treasure—the	girl.	The	second	treasure—
the	schoolgirl.	The	third	treasure—modern.	And	it	was	all	locked	up	in	her	like	a
nut	within	a	shell,	but	she	couldn't	reach	her	arsenal,	even	though	she	felt	my
heinous	gaze,	and	knew	that	a	spurned	admirer	would	naturally	want	to	befoul,
ruin,	destroy,	and	psychologically	deface	her	girlish	beauty.
And	I	was	not	at	all	surprised	that	the	girl,	sensing	the	threat	that	I	secretly
wished	her	to	become	ugly,	went	berserk.	She	jumped	out	of	bed.	She	threw	off
her	nightshirt.	She	pranced	all	over	the	room.	She	no	longer	cared	that	I	was
spying	on	her,	indeed,	she	seemed	to	be	challenging	me	to	a	fight.	Her	legs
nimbly	and	lightly	lifted	her	body,	her	hands	fluttered	in	the	air.	She	tucked	her
little	head	this	way	and	that.	She	enfolded	her	head	in	her	arms.	She	shook	hercurls.	She	lay	on	the	floor,	then	rose	again.	She	sobbed,	she	laughed,	she	sang
softly.	She	jumped	on	the	table,	from	the	table	onto	the	couch.	She	seemed
scared	to	stop	even	for	a	moment	as	if	chased	by	rats	and	mice,	as	if	eager	for
the	lightness	of	her	movement	to	lift	her	above	all	horror.	She	no	longer	knew
what	to	hold	on	to.	She	finally	grabbed	a	belt	and	began	whipping	her	back	with
all	her	might,	anything	to	subject	herself	to	youthful	pain...	Something	caught
me	by	the	throat!	Oh,	how	her	beauty	tormented	her,	drove	her	to	do	things,
hurled	and	threw	her	about,	rolled	her	around!	I	stood	dead	still	by	the	keyhole,
my	mug	absurd	and	loathsome,	equally	split	between	rapture	and	hate.	The
schoolgirl,	hurled	about	by	her	beauty,	turned	into	a	hellion.	All	the	while	I
adored	her	and	hated	her,	I	quivered	with	delight,	my	mug	spasmodically
expanding	and	contracting	like	stretched	guttapercha,	my	God,	so	this	is	where
love	of	beauty	will	drive	us!
Midnight	struck	in	the	dining	room.	There	was	a	quiet	knocking	on	the	window.
Three	times.	I	froze	in	fear.	The	whole	thing	was	about	to	begin.	Kopyrda,
Kopyrda	was	here!	The	schoolgirl	stopped	jumping	about.	The	knocking
repeated,	insistent,	quiet.	She	went	to	the	window	and	pulled	back	the	blind
slightly.	She	stared...
"Is	that	you?	..."	a	whisper	came	from	the	porch	in	the	night's	silence.
She	pulled	on	the	string	of	the	blind.	Moonlight	poured	into	the	room.	I	saw	her
standing	in	her	nightshirt	now,	tense,	watchful...
"What	do	you	want?"	she	asked.
I	admired	her	command	of	the	situation,	the	magpie	that	she	was!	Because	this
was	a	surprise—she	hadn't	expected	Kopyrda	to	arrive	at	her	window.	Another
girl	in	her	place,	an	old fashioned	one,	would	have	gone	on	with	trite	questions
and	exclamations:	"I	beg	your	pardon!	What's	the	meaning	of	this?	What	do	you
want	at	this	hour?"	But	this	modern	one	sensed	instinctively	that	to	show
surprise	would	have	ruined	it	.	.	.	that	it	would	be	more	beautiful	without
surprise...	Oh,	mistress	of	the	situation!	She	leaned	out	the	window
unceremoniously,	cordially,	like	a	good	sport.
"What	do	you	want?"	resting	her	chin	on	her	arms,	she	repeated	in	the	subdued
tone	of	a	young	female.
Since	he	had	addressed	her	informally,	she	replied	in	kind.	And	I	admired	the
unbelievably	abrupt	transition	in	style—from	jumping	up	and	down	into
sociability!	Who	would	have	guessed	that	only	a	moment	ago	she	had	been
jumping	and	throwing	herself	about?	Modern	though	he	was	himself,	Kopyrdawas	somewhat	put	off	by	the	schoolgirl's	remarkable	matter of factness.	Yet	he
immediately	tuned	in	to	her	tone	and,	boyishly,	nonchalantly,	with	his	hands	in
his	pockets,	he	said:	Let	me	in.
"What	for?"
He	whistled	and	said	rudely:
"Don't	you	know?	Let	me	in!"
He	seemed	excited,	and	his	voice	trembled	slightly,	but	he	tried	to	hide	his
excitement.	All	the	while	I	shuddered	at	the	thought	that	he	might	spill	the	whole
thing	about	the	letter.	Luckily,	talking	a	lot	or	being	terribly	surprised	wouldn't
be	in	keeping	with	the	modern	way,	they	had	to	pretend	that	it	all	went	without
saying.	Nonchalance,	brutality,	terseness,	disdain—this	was	poetry,	just	as
sighing,	moaning,	and	mandolins	would	have	been	to	lovers	of	yore.	He	knew
that	the	only	way	to	possess	the	girl	would	be	with	disdain,	that	without	disdain
—nothing	doing.	His	face	was	in	the	vines	that	were	creeping	up	the	wall,	and
with	a	hint	of	sensuous,	modern	sentimen talism	in	his	voice	he	added	longingly,
emphatically,	numbly:
"You	wanted	it!"
She	made	a	move	to	close	the	window.	But	suddenly—as	if	this	move	actually
provoked	her	to	do	the	opposite—she	stopped	...	She	tightened	her	lips.	She
stood	still	for	a	second,	only	her	eyes	moving	from	side	to	side,	slowly.	The
expression	that	came	over	her	face	was	...	an	expression	of	supermodern
cynicism	...	And	the	schoolgirl,	excited	by	the	expression	of	cynicism,	by	eyes
and	lips	in	the	moonlight,	in	the	window,	suddenly	leaned	out	halfway,	and	with
her	palm—nothing	humorous	in	her	gesture—she	lousled	his	hair.
"Come	in!"	she	whispered.
Kopyrda	showed	no	surprise.	This	was	no	time	to	show	surprise	at	her	or	at
himself.	The	slightest	hesitancy	would	have	ruined	everything.	He	had	to	act	as
if	the	reality	that	they	were	creating	between	them	were	something	ordinary,
everyday.	Oh,	what	a	master!	And	so	he	acted	accordingly.	He	clambered	onto
the	windowsill	and	jumped	to	the	floor	of	her	room	exactly	as	if	he	were	in	the
habit	of	clambering	every	night	to	visit	a	newly	met	schoolgirl.	Once	in	the	room
he	laughed	softly,	just	to	be	on	the	safe	side.	She,	however,	took	him	by	the	hair,
pulled	back	his	head	and	with	her	lips	devoured	his	lips!
The	devil,	the	devil	of	it!	What	if	she's	still	a	virgin?!	What	if	the	girl	is	still	a
virgin?!	What	if	she's	a	virgin,	and	she's	about	to	give	herself	without	ceremony
to	the	first	man	who	knocks	on	her	window.	The	devil	of	it,	the	devil!	Somethingcaught	me	by	the	throat.	Because,	if	she	were	an	ordinary	tart	and	a	slut,	well,	no
harm	done,	but	if	she's	a	virgin,	then—I	must	admit—this	modern	one	was	able
to	elicit	incredibly	wild	beauty	from	within	herself	and	from	Kopyrda.	To	be
able—so	impudently	and	quietly,	so	brutally	and	effortlessly—to	grab	the	boy	by
the	hair—and	to	grab	me	by	the	throat...	Ha!	She	knew	I	was	peeping	through
the	keyhole,	and	she	stopped	at	nothing	as	long	as	she	was	victorious	through
her	beauty.	I	was	shaken.	If	only	it	were	he	who	grabbed	her	by	the	hair—but	it
was	she	who	grabbed	him	by	the	hair!	Hey,	you	young	ladies,	marrying	with
pomp	and	after	much	ado,	you	trite	ones,	who	allow	a	stolen	kiss,	look	how	this
modern	one	goes	after	love	and	how	she	treats	her	own	self!	She	threw	Kopyrda
onto	the	couch.	I	was	shaken	again.	No	holds	barred!	The	seventeen year old
obviously	played	her	beauty	as	her	trump	card.	I	prayed	that	Pimko	would	arrive
—if	Pimko	lets	me	down	I'm	lost,	never,	never	will	I	be	free	of	this	modern	one's
wild	charms.	She	was	choking	me,	strangling	me,	yet	all	along	it	was	I—I	was
the	one,	when	all	was	said	and	done,	who	wanted	to	strangle	her,	to	conquer	her!
Her	girlhood	in	full	bloom,	she	and	Kopyrda	meanwhile	went	on	hugging	each
other	on	the	couch,	and,	with	his	help,	she	was	about	to	reach	the	climax	of	her
charms.	Casually,	slapdash,	lustfully,	and	without	love,	without	any	respect	for
herself,	just	to	grab	me	by	the	throat	with	her	wild,	schoolgirl	poetry.	The	devil
of	it,	the	devil,	she	was	winning,	winning,	winning!
At	last	there	was	a	godsend	knock	on	the	window.	They	stopped	hugging.	At
last!	Pimko	was	coming	to	the	rescue.	This	was	to	be	the	final	reckoning.	Will
Pimko	manage	to	spoil	her	beauty	and	her	charms—or	will	he	enhance	it	all?
That's	what	I	was	thinking	as	I	was	preparing	my	mug	behind	the	door	to
intervene.	For	the	moment	Pimko's	knocking	brought	relief	because	they	had	to
stop	their	orgy	and	frenzy,	and	Kopyrda	whispered:
"Someone's	knocking."
The	schoolgirl	jumped	to	her	feet	from	the	couch.	They	listened,	wondering
whether	they	could	resume	their	frenzy.	More	knocking.
"Who	is	it?"	she	asked.
There	was	ardent	puffing	and	huffing	at	the	window:
"Zuta,	dear!"
She	pulled	back	the	blind	slightly,	signaling	to	Kopyrda	to	step	back.	But	before
she	could	say	anything	Pimko	frantically	clambered	into	the	room.	He	was	afraid
of	being	seen	at	the	window.
"Zuta,	dear!"	he	whispered	passionately,	carnally,	"little	Zuta!	Oh,	myschoolgirl!	Oh,	little	one!	Call	me	by	my	first	name!	You're	my	colleague!	I'm
your	colleague!"	My	letter	must	have	gone	to	his	head.	The	double barreled	and
trite	prof's	lips	were	painfully	contorted	with	poetry.	"Yes,	by	my	first	name,
Zuta,	dear!	Will	anyone	see	us?	Where's	Mama?"	But	the	danger	was
intoxicating	him	even	further.	"Look	at	her	...	such	a	little	one,	so	young...	yet	so
insolent...	with	no	regard	for	age	or	status	...	How	could	you	...	how	dare	you	..	.
toward	me?	Do	you	find	me	exciting?	Call	me	by	my	first	name!	Yes,	yes!	Tell
me	what	you	fancy	in	me."
Ha,	ha,	ha,	ha,	ha,	what	a	lustful	pedagogue!
"What	do	you	want?	What's	the	matter	with	you,	sir?	.	.	."	she	stammered.	The
other	matter,	with	Kopyrda,	was	over,	it	came	to	naught.
"Someone's	here!"	exclaimed	Pimko	in	the	semi darkness.
Silence	was	the	only	response.	Kopyrda	was	mum.	The	modern	one	stood
between	the	two	of	them	in	her	nightshirt,	senselessly,	playing	the	little	la di da.
Whereupon	I	screamed	from	behind	the	door:
"Thieves!	Thieves!"
Pimko	twirled	around	a	couple	of	times	as	if	pulled	by	a	string,	then	ran	for
cover	to	the	closet.	Kopyrda	tried	to	jump	out	the	window,	but	he	didn't	make	it
and	hid	in	the	other	closet.	I	ran	into	the	room	as	I	was,	just	in	my	shirt	and
underpants.	I	caught	them!	Red handed!	Behind	me	the	Youngbloods,	he—still
smacking	her,	she—being	smacked.
"Thieves?!"	he	shouted	like	a	bourgeois,	dime a dozen	little	engineer,	barefoot,
in	his	underpants,	his	sense	of	ownership	riding	high.
"Someone	came	in	through	the	window!"	I	exclaimed.	I	turned	on	the	light.	The
schoolgirl	lay	under	her	comforter,	pretending	to	be	asleep.
"What	happened?"	she	asked	half asleep,	her	style	perfect,	deceitful.
"Yet	another	intrigue!"	exclaimed	the	Youngblood	woman,	in	her	nightgown,
casting	a	basilisk	glance	at	me,	her	hair	a	mess,	dark	blotches	on	her	cheeks.
"Intrigue?"	I	exclaimed,	picking	Kopyrda's	suspenders	up	off	the	floor.	"What
intrigue?"
"Suspenders,"	the	little	engineer	said	numbly.
"They're	mine!"	the	Youngblood	girl	exclaimed	insolently.	The	girl's	insolence
had	a	soothing	effect,	but	of	course	no	one	believed	her!
I	jerked	open	the	closet	door,	and	Kopyrda's	lower	body	appeared	to	those
assembled—a	pair	of	lean	legs	in	pressed	flannel	pants,	wearing	lightweightsport	shoes.	His	upper	body	was	wrapped	in	dresses	hanging	in	the	closet.
"Aah...	Zuta!"	the	Youngblood	woman	was	the	first	to	speak.
The	schoolgirl	tucked	her	cute	little	head	under	the	covers,	only	her	legs	and	the
mop	of	her	hair	showing.	How	skillfully	she	played	it!	Another	girl	in	her	place
would	have	mumbled	something	under	her	breath,	would	have	looked	for
excuses.	But	this	one	just	stuck	out	her	naked	legs,	moving	her	legs	to	and	fro
and	playing	on	the	situation—with	her	legs,	with	her	movement	and	charm—as
on	a	flute.	Her	parents	looked	at	each	other.
"Zuta,"	Mr.	Youngblood	said.
And	they	both	began	laughing.	All	the	smacking,	vulgarity,	and	vileness	left
them,	and	a	strange	beauty	set	in.	The	parents—amused,	animated,	thrilled,	quite
at	ease,	and	laughing	indulgently—looked	at	the	girl's	body	while	she	went	on
fussing	and	timidly	hiding	her	pretty	little	head.	Kopyrda,	realizing	that	he	need
not	fear	the	strict	principles	of	yore,	came	out	of	the	closet	and	stood	smiling,
jacket	in	hand,	a	nice,	fair haired	modern	boy,	caught	in	the	act	with	the	parents'
girl.	The	Youngblood	woman	squinted	at	me	maliciously.	She	was	triumphant.	I
must	have	been	jinxed.	I	wanted	to	dishonor	the	girl,	yet	the	modern	boy	had	not
dishonored	her	at	all!	To	make	me	feel	totally	superfluous,	she	asked:
"And	what	are	you,	young	man,	doing	here?	Our	young	man	shouldn't	be
concerned	with	all	this!"
Thus	far	I	had	deliberately	refrained	from	opening	the	closet	where	Pimko	was
hiding.	My	intent	was	to	let	the	situation	stabilize	until	it	reached	the	fullness	of
the	young	and	modern	style.	I	now	opened	the	closet	in	silence.	Pimko,
crouching,	had	hidden	himself	between	the	dresses—only	a	pair	of	legs,	a
professorial	pair	of	legs	in	crumpled	trousers	was	visible,	and	those	legs	stood	in
the	closet,	incredible,	crazy,	tacked	on	...
The	effect	knocked	them	out	of	their	socks,	bowled	them	over.	The	laughter	died
on	the	Youngbloods'	lips.	The	whole	situation	shook	as	if	struck	from	the	side	by
a	murderer's	knife.	Idiotic	indeed.
"What	is	this?"	whispered	Mrs.	Youngblood,	her	face	paling.
From	behind	the	dresses	came	a	little	cough	and	a	conventional	tittering	with
which	Pimko	prepared	his	entrance	into	the	room.	Since	he	knew	that	in	a
moment	he	would	appear	foolish,	he	was	ushering	in	his	tomfoolery	with	foolish
laughter.	The	tittering	from	behind	the	girl's	dresses	was	so	cabaretlike	that	Mr.
Youngblood	chuckled	once	and	got	stuck...	Pimko	stepped	out	of	the	closet	and
bowed,	feeling	foolish	outwardly,	miserable	inwardly	...	I	felt	a	vindictive,furious	sadism	inwardly,	but	outwardly—I	burst	out	laughing.	My	revenge
dissolved	in	laughter.
But	the	Youngbloods	were	dumbfounded.	Two	men,	one	in	each	closet!	What's
more,	in	one	of	them—an	old	man.	If	there	were	two	young	ones!	Or,	for	that
matter,	two	old	ones.	But	no,	one	young	and	one	old.	An	old	man,	and	Pimko	to
boot.	The	situation	had	no	axis no	diagonals—no	commentary	could	be	found	to
fit	the	situation.	They	automatically	looked	at	the	girl,	but	the	schoolgirl	played
possum	under	the	covers.
Suddenly	Pimko,	wanting	to	clarify	the	situation,	cleared	his	throat,	grinned
pleadingly,	and	began	to	explain	something	about	a	letter	.	.	.	that	Miss	Zuta	had
written	to	him	.	.	.	that	it	was	just	about	Norwid	.	.	.	but	that	Miss	Zuta	wanted	it
to	be	informal.	.	.	informal...	on	first name	basis...	with	him...	that's	all	he	wanted
too	...	Well,	I've	never	heard	anything	so	obscene	and	at	the	same	time	so	idiotic
in	my	whole	life,	the	little	old	man's	secret	and	private	ravings	were	impossible
to	understand	in	a	situation	so	clearly	illuminated	by	the	ceiling	lamp,	but	no	one
wanted	to	understand	him	anyway,	so	no	one	understood.	Pimko	saw	that	no	one
wanted	to,	but	he'd	gone	too	far	already—the	prof	thrown	off	balance	as	a	prof
was	utterly	lost,	I	couldn't	believe	that	it	was	the	same	absolute	and	seasoned
double barreled	man	who	had	once	dealt	me	the	pupa.	As	he	was	drowning	in
the	sticky	mess	of	his	explanations,	his	ineffectiveness	evoked	pity,	and	I	would
have	pounced	on	him,	but	I	gave	up.	Pimko's	dark	and	murky	ravings	pushed	the
engineer	into	officialdom—and	this	was	stronger	than	the	legitimate	distrust	the
engineer	would	have	felt	for	me	in	this	situation.	He	exclaimed:
"What	are	you	doing	here,	sir,	at	this	hour,	may	I	ask?"
This	in	turn	dictated	the	tone	to	Pimko.	For	a	brief	moment	he	was	back	to	form.
"Do	not	raise	your	voice,	sir."
To	which	Mr.	Youngblood	replied:
"What?	What?	You	dare	correct	me	in	my	own	house?"
But	Mrs.	Engineer	looked	out	the	window	and	squeaked.	The	bearded	face,	twig
in	mouth,	appeared	above	the	railing.	I	had	totally	forgotten	about	the	beggar!	I
ordered	him	to	stand	with	the	twig	today	as	well,	but	I	forgot	to	give	him	the
zloty.	The	bearded	man	steadfastly	stood	until	nightfall,	and	when	he	saw	us	in
the	illuminated	window	he	showed	his	"face	for	hire"	and,	decked	in	greenery,
reminded	me	to	pay	him!	The	face	slid	between	us	as	if	on	a	platter.
"What	does	this	man	want?"	exclaimed	Mrs.	Engineer.	The	sight	of	a	ghost
wouldn't	have	had	a	greater	impact.	Pimko	and	Mr.	Youngblood	fell	silent.The	wretch,	who	for	a	moment	became	the	center	of	attention,	moved	the	twig	as
if	it	were	his	mustache,	he	didn't	know	what	to	say.	So	he	said:
"A	favor	for	the	beggar."
"Give	him	something,"	Mrs.	Engineer	dropped	her	hands	and	spread	her	fingers
wide.	"Give	him	something,"	she	screamed	hysterically,	"so	he'll	go	away..."
The	engineer	fumbled	for	change	in	his	pockets	but	didn't	find	any.	Pimko,
clutching	at	every	possible	activity,	quickly	took	out	his	wallet,	and,	perhaps
reckoning	that,	in	the	general	confusion,	Mr.	Youngblood	would	accept	the
change	from	him,	which	of	course	would	make	further	hostilities	rather	difficult
—but	Mr.	Youngblood	did	not	accept.	Petty	accounting	tore	in	through	the
window	and	raged	among	people.	As	for	me,	I	stood	there	with	my	mug,
carefully	watching	the	unfolding	of	events,	ready	to	jump,	but	actually	I	watched
it	all	as	if	through	a	magnifying	glass.	Oh,	whatever	happened	to	my	revenge,
and	to	my	messing	up	their	lives,	and	to	the	roar	of	wrenched	reality,	and	to	style
bursting	open,	and	to	my	frenzy	atop	all	the	wreckage?	The	farce	slowly	began
to	wear	me	out.	I	thought	about	irrelevant	things,	for	example—where	does
Kopyrda	buy	his	ties,	is	Mrs.	Engineer	fond	of	cats,	how	much	does	it	cost	them
to	live	here?
All	this	time	Kopyrda	stood	with	his	hands	in	his	pockets.	This	modern	boy
didn't	come	up	to	me,	his	face	showed	no	signs	of	recognizing	me—he	was
already	too	annoyed	by	Pimko	being	coupled	with	the	girl	to	say	hello	to	a
schoolmate	dressed	in	nothing	but	underwear—neither	coupling	suited	him	in
the	least.	When	the	Youngbloods	and	Pimko	began	looking	for	change,	Kopyrda
slowly	turned	toward	the	door—I	opened	my	mouth	to	shout,	but	Pimko,
noticing	Kopyrda's	maneuver,	quickly	put	away	his	wallet	and	followed	him.
Suddenly,	when	the	engineer	saw	them	both	absconding	so	swiftly,	he	bounded
after	them	like	a	cat	after	a	mouse.
"I	beg	your	pardon!"	he	exclaimed,	"you're	not	getting	off	scot free!"
Kopyrda	and	Pimko	stood	still.	Kopyrda,	now	infuriated	by	being	coupled	with
Pimko,	moved	away	from	him;	Pimko,	however,	under	the	momentum	of
Kopyrda's	movement,	automatically	moved	closer	to	him—and	so	they	stood
like	two	brothers—one	younger	.	.	.	one	older...
Mrs.	Engineer,	totally	unnerved,	grabbed	the	engineer	by	the	arm.
"Don't	make	a	scene!	Don't	make	a	scene!"	Which	of	course	provoked	him	to
make	a	scene.
"Forgive	me!"	he	roared,	"but	I	am	her	father,	aren't	I!	And	I	ask	you—how	andwith	what	in	mind	did	you	two	gentlemen	find	yourselves	in	my	daughter's
bedroom?	What	is	the	meaning	of	this?	What	is	this?"
Suddenly	he	looked	at	me	and	fell	silent,	terror	creeping	over	his	cheeks,	he
realized	this	was	grist	for	my	mill,	the	mill	of	scandal,	and—he	would	have
stopped	talking,	he	would	have—but	having	started	it...	he	repeated	once	more:
"What	is	the	meaning	of	this?"	softly,	just	to	round	things	off,	secretly	pleading
that	the	issue	go	no	further	...
There	was	silence	because	no	one	could	answer	him.	Everyone	had	his	own
understandable	rationale,	but	the	whole	made	no	sense.	In	the	silence	the
nonsense	was	stifling.	And	suddenly	the	girl's	hollow,	hopeless	sobs	came	from
under	the	covers.	Oh,	how	masterful!	She	sobbed,	sticking	her	naked	calves
from	under	the	covers,	her	calves	which,	as	she	sobbed,	slid	out	more	and	more
from	under	the	covers,	and	the	crying	of	an	underage	girl	united	Pimko,
Kopyrda,	and	her	parents,	and	threaded	them	on	a	string	of	demonism.	The
whole	matter,	as	if	cut	with	a	knife,	ceased	to	be	funny	and	nonsensical,	it	made
sense	again,	a	modern	yet	murky,	black,	dramatic,	and	tragic	sense.	Kopyrda,
Pimko,	and	the	Youngbloods	felt	better—while	I,	caught	by	the	throat,	felt
worse.
"You	have	...defiled	her,"	the	mother	whispered.	"Don't	cry,	don't	cry,	child	..."
"Congratulations,	Professor!"	the	engineer	exclaimed	furiously.	"You'll	answer	to
me	for	this!"
Pimko,	it	seemed,	breathed	a	sigh	of	relief.	Even	this	felt	better	than	not	having
been	placed	anywhere	at	all.	So	they've	defiled	her.	The	situation	turned	to	the
girl's	advantage.
"Police!"	I	exclaimed,	"we	must	call	the	police!"
This	was	a	risky	step,	because	police	and	an	underage	girl	had	for	a	long	time
formed	a	rounded,	beautiful,	and	grim	whole—and	so	the	Youngbloods	proudly
raised	their	heads—though	my	goal	was	to	scare	Pimko.	He	paled,	cleared	his
throat,	and	coughed.
"Police,"	the	mother	repeated,	savoring	the	image	of	police	standing	over	the
girl's	naked	legs,	"police,	police	..."
"Please	do	believe	me,"	the	professor	stammered,	"please	believe	me,	all	of	you	.
.	.	There's	some	mistake	here,	I'm	being	accused	falsely..."
"Yes!"	I	exclaimed.	"I'm	a	witness.	I	saw	it	through	my	window!	The	professor
walked	into	the	garden	to	relieve	himself.	Miss	Zuta	looked	out	the	window,	the
professor	said	'hello,'	and	then	came	the	usual	way	through	the	door,	which	MissZuta	opened	for	him!"
Pimko	broke	down	in	fear	of	the	police.	Despicably,	like	a	coward,	he	clutched
at	this	explanation,	regardless	of	its	sickening	and	shameful	meaning.
"Yes,	that's	right,	I	had	the	urge,	I	stepped	into	the	garden,	I	forgot	that	this	is
where	you	live—and	Miss	Zuta	happened	to	look	out	the	window,	so	I
pretended,	hee,	hee,	hee,	I	pretended	that	I	came	to	visit...	You	understand	...	in
this	drastic	situation	...	it's	a	
quid	pro	quo,	a	quid	pro	quo,	
"	he	kept	repeating.
It	struck	those	assembled	as	vile	and	revolting.	The	girl	pulled	her	legs	under	the
covers.	Kopyrda	pretended	not	to	hear,	the	Youngblood	woman	turned	her	back
to	Pimko,	but,	realizing	that	she	had	turned	her	back	to	him,	she	quickly	turned
to	face	him.	Mr.	Youngblood	blinked—ha,	they	had	again	fallen	into	the	throes
of	that	deadly	part,	vulgarity	returned	full	steam,	I	watched	its	return	with
interest,	and	how	it	was	bowling	them	over;	was	it	the	same	part	in	which	I	had
recently	been	wallowing,	yes,	the	same	part	perhaps—	except	that	this	time	it
was	strictly	between	them.	The	Youngblood	girl	gave	no	sign	of	life	under	the
covers.	And	Mr.	Youngblood	giggled—who	knows	what	tickled	him—maybe
Pimko's	
quid	pro	quo	
brought	back	memories	of	a	cabaret	under	that	name	that
had	existed	in	Warsaw—he	then	burst	into	that	ultimate	giggle	of	a	petty
engineer,	that	backside,	ghastly,	pantomime	giggle—he	exploded	and—furious
at	Pimko	for	his	own	giggling—he	jumped	toward	him,	and,	with	a	swift,
arrogant,	little	engineer's	slap,	he	whacked	him	in	the	mug.	He	whacked—he
froze,	panting,	his	arm	still	in	the	air.	He	turned	serious.	Rigid.	I	brought	my
jacket	and	my	shoes	from	my	room	and	began	to	dress	slowly,	not	letting	the
scene	out	of	my	sight.
Having	received	the	slap	in	the	face,	something	gurgled	in	Pimko's	throat,
corked	him	up—yet	I	was	convinced	that	deep	down	he	was	grateful	for	the	slap,
it	somehow	defined	him.
"You	shall	pay	for	this,"	he	said	coldly,	visibly	relieved.	He	bowed	toward	the
engineer,	the	engineer	bowed	toward	him.	Eagerly	taking	advantage	of	the
bowing,	Pimko	turned	to	the	door.	Kopyrda	quickly	joined	in	the	bowing	and
followed	Pimko,	in	the	hope	of	also	slipping	out	.	.	.	Mr.	Youngblood	sprang	up.
"What?	There	are	consequences	to	be	faced	here,	a	duel,	while	this	scoundrel
Kopyrda	wants	to	leave	as	if	nothing	had	happened	and	to	shirk	all
responsibility!"	And	so	punch	him	in	the	snoot	too!	The	engineer	jumped	toward
him	with	his	arm	outstretched,	but	in	a	split	second	he	realized	that	he	couldn't
very	well	slap	a	sniveling	brat	in	the	face,	a	schoolboy,	a	whippersnapper,	hisarm	followed	an	awkward	twist	and,	unable	to	counteract	the	momentum	he
grabbed	Kopyrda,	instead	of	hitting	him	he	grabbed	him	by	the	chin.	This	illegal
hold	infuriated	Kopyrda	more	than	if	he	had	been	slapped	in	the	face,	and	what's
more,	the	false	move—a	foul	after	a	long	quarter of an hour's	nonsense—
released	his	most	primitive	instincts.	God	knows	what	had	hatched	in	his	head—
that	the	engineer	caught	him	on	purpose,	"if	you	me,	I	you"—some	such	thought
must	have	gripped	him,	therefore,	according	to	a	law	that	one	might	call	"the	law
of	the	diagonal,"	he	bent	down	and	swept	the	engineer	below	the	knee.	Mr.
Youngblood	came	down	with	a	thud,	whereupon	Kopyrda	bit	his	left	flank,	he
hung	on	to	him	with	his	teeth	and	wouldn't	let	go—he	then	lifted	his	face,	madly
sweeping	the	room	with	his	eyes	from	one	end	to	the	other	and	biting	into	Mr.
Youngblood's	flank.
I	was	tying	my	tie	and	putting	on	my	jacket,	but	I	stopped,	intrigued.	I	had	never
seen	anything	like	it.	Mrs.	Engineer	rushed	to	her	husband's	rescue,	she	caught
Kopyrda	by	the	leg	and	pulled	on	it	with	all	her	might.	They	all	swirled	and
tumbled	down	in	a	heap.	What's	more,	Pimko,	who	stood	a	step	from	the
swirling	heap	suddenly	did	something	exceedingly	strange,	almost	beyond
telling.	Had	the	prof	finally	given	up?	Had	he	surrendered?	Had	he	run	out	of
determination	to	keep	standing	while	others	lay?	Did	lying	down	seem	no	worse
to	him	than	standing	on	his	legs?	Suffice	it	to	say	that	he	voluntarily	lay	down	on
his	back	in	a	corner	and	raised	his	four	paws	in	a	gesture	of	complete
helplessness.	I	tied	my	tie.	I	wasn't	moved	even	when	the	girl	threw	off	her
covers,	sprang	up	sobbing,	and	proceeded	to	jump	up	and	down	around	the
Youngbloods,	who	were	rolling	about	with	Kopyrda,	as	if	she	were	a	referee	at	a
boxing	match,	pleading	through	her	tears:
"Mommy!	Daddy!"
The	engineer,	stupefied	by	the	rolling	about	and	looking	for	a	handhold,
unwittingly	grabbed	her	leg	above	the	ankle.	She	fell.	The	four	of	them	rolled	on
the	ground	quietly,	as	if	in	church,	because	shame	wouldn't	let	them	do	it
otherwise.	At	one	point	I	saw	the	mother	biting	her	daughter,	Kopyrda	pulling
Mrs.	Youngblood,	the	engineer	pushing	Kopyrda,	then	Miss	Youngblood's	calf
flashed	on	top	of	her	mother's	head.
At	the	same	time	the	professor	in	the	corner	began	to	display	an	ever	stronger
predilection	for	swarming—lying	on	his	back,	all	fours	extended	upward,	he
definitely	began	to	gravitate	in	their	direction	and	oscillate	(seemingly	without
moving)	toward	them,	doubtless	the	swarming	and	rolling	about	became	for	him
the	only	viable	solution.	He	couldn't	get	up,	and	why	should	he?—yet	hecouldn't	lie	on	his	back	any	longer.	Just	to	get	some	sort	of	hold	would	be
enough,	and	when	the	family	and	Kopyrda	rolled	closer—he	caught	Mr.
Youngblood	in	the	vicinity	of	the	liver	and	was	pulled	into	the	vortex.	I	finished
packing	the	most	essential	things	into	a	small	suitcase	and	put	on	my	hat.	I	was
weary	of	it	all.	Farewell,	oh	modern	one,	farewell	Youngbloods	and	Kopyrda,
farewell	Pimko—no,	not	farewell,	because	how	could	I	say	farewell	to
something	that	didn't	exist	anymore.	I	was	departing	with	a	light	heart.	Oh,	how
sweet,	how	sweet	it	is	to	shake	the	dust	off	my	shoes	and	depart,	leaving	nothing
behind,	no,	not	depart,	just	go	...	Was	it	so	that	Pimko,	the	classic	prof,	had	dealt
me	the	pupa,	that	I	had	been	a	pupil	at	the	school,	a	modern	boy	with	a	modern
girl,	that	I	had	been	the	dancing	one	in	the	bedroom,	the	one	pulling	wings	off	a
fly,	the	one	peeping	in	the	bathroom,	tra	la	la...	?	That	I	had	been	the	one	with
the	pupa,	with	the	mug,	with	the	leg,	tra	la	la	...	?	No,	it	was	all	gone,	I	was
neither	young	nor	old,	neither	modern	nor	old fashioned,	neither	the	pupil	nor
the	boy,	neither	mature	nor	immature,	I	was	neither	this	nor	that,	I	was	nothing...
To	depart	and	go,	to	go	and	depart	and	carry	no	memories.	Oh,	blithe
indifference!	No	memories!	When	everything	dies	within	you,	and	no	one	has
yet	had	time	to	beget	you	again.	Oh,	it	is	worth	living	for	death,	to	know	that	all
has	died	within	us,	that	it	is	no	more,	that	all	is	empty	and	barren,	all	quiet	and
pure—and	as	I	departed	it	seemed	to	me	that	I	was	going	not	alone	but	with
myself—and	right	next	to	me,	or	maybe	within	me	or	around	me,	walked
someone	identical	and	cognate,	mine—within	me,	mine—with	me,	and	there
was	no	love	between	us,	no	hate,	no	lust,	no	revulsion,	no	ugliness,	no	beauty,	no
laughter,	no	body	parts,	no	feeling	nor	anything	mechanical,	nothing,	nothing,
nothing	.	.	.	But	only	for	one	hundredth	of	a	second.	Because	as	I	was	crossing
the	kitchen,	feeling	my	way	in	the	semi darkness,	someone	called	softly	from	the
servants'	quarters:
"Joey,	Joey..."
It	was	Kneadus	sitting	on	the	servant	girl,	hurriedly	putting	on	his	shoes.
"I'm	here.	Are	you	leaving?	Wait,	I'll	go	with	you."
His	whisper	struck	me	from	the	side,	and	I	stopped	as	if	a	bullet	had	hit	me.	I
couldn't	see	his	mug	distinctly	in	the	darkness,	but	judging	by	his	voice	it	must
have	looked	horrible.	The	servant	girl	breathed	heavily.
"Shhh	...	be	quiet.	Let's	go."	He	climbed	off	the	servant	girl.	"Here,	this	way...
Careful—here's	a	basket."
We	found	ourselves	in	the	street.It	was	getting	light.	Little	houses,	trees,	railings	stretched	in	orderly	fashion	as	if
on	a	string—and	the	air,	limpid	near	the	ground,	thickening	above	into	a
desperate	mist.	Asphalt.	Space.	Dew.	Emptiness.	Next	to	me	Kneadus	buttoning
his	pants.	I	tried	to	avoid	looking	at	him.	From	the	open	windows	of	the	villa—a
pale	electric	light	and	a	continuous	shoving	of	bodies	rolling	about.	A	piercing
chill,	a	sleepless	cold	as	if	on	a	train;	I	began	to	shiver,	my	teeth	chattered.
Through	the	open	window	Kneadus	heard	the	Youngbloods	shoving	and	asked:
"What's	that?	Is	someone	getting	a	massage?"
I	didn't	answer,	and	he,	noticing	the	small	suitcase	in	my	hand,	asked:
"Are	you	running	away?"
I	lowered	my	head.	I	knew	he'd	catch	me,	he'd	have	to	catch	me	because	there
were	just	the	two	of	us,	next	to	each	other.	But	I	couldn't	move	away	from	him
without	a	reason.	So	he	moved	closer,	and	with	his	hand	he	took	me	by	the	hand.
"Are	you	running	away?	I'll	run	away	too.	We'll	go	together.	I've	raped	the
servant	girl.	But	that's	not	it,	that's	not	it...	A	farmhand,	a	farmhand!	Let's	run
away	to	the	countryside—if	you	want	to.	To	the	countryside	we'll	go.	There	are
farmhands	there!	Out	in	the	countryside!	We'll	go	together,	do	you	want	to?	To
the	farmhand,	Joey,	to	the	farmhand,	the	farmhand!"	he	went	on	repeating
frantically.	I	held	my	head	straight	and	stiff,	not	looking	at	him.
"Kneadus,	what	good	is	your	farmhand	to	me?"
But	as	soon	as	I	began	walking	he	went	with	me,	and	I	went	with	him—we	went
together.11	Preface	to	"The	Child	Runs	Deep	in	Filibert"
And	again	a	preface	...	and	I'm	a	captive	to	a	preface,	I	can't	do	without	a
preface,	I	must	have	a	preface,	because	the	law	of	symmetry	requires	that	the
story	in	which	the	child	runs	deep	in	Filidor	should	have	a	corresponding	story
in	which	the	child	runs	deep	in	Filibert,	while	the	preface	to	Filidor	requires	a
corresponding	preface	to	Filibert.	Even	if	I	want	to	I	can't,	I	can't,	and	I	can't
avoid	the	ironclad	laws	of	symmetry	and	analogy.	But	it's	high	time	to	interrupt,
to	cease,	to	emerge	from	the	greenery	if	only	for	a	moment,	to	come	back	to	my
senses	and	peer	from	under	the	weight	of	a	billion	little	sprouts,	buds,	and	leaves
so	that	no	one	can	say	that	I've	gone	crazy,	totally	blah,	blah.	And	before	I	move
any	further	on	the	road	of	second rate,	intermediate,	not quite human	horrors,	I
have	to	clarify,	rationalize,	substantiate,	explain,	and	systematize,	I	have	to	draw
out	the	primary	thought	from	which	all	other	thoughts	in	this	book	originate,	and
to	reveal	the	primeval	torment	of	all	torments	herein	mentioned	and	brought	into
relief.	And	I	must	introduce	a	hierarchy	of	torments	as	well	as	a	hierarchy	of
thoughts,	and	provide	analytic,	synthetic,	and	philosophical	comments	on	this
work	so	that	the	reader	will	know	where	the	head	is,	where	the	legs,	the	nose,
where	the	heel	is,	so	that	I'm	not	accused	of	being	unaware	of	my	own	goals,	of
not	marching	straight	and	stiffly	forward	like	the	greatest	writers	of	omnitime,
but	that	I've	senselessly	gone	bonkers.	But	which	of	the	torments	is	the	chief	and
fundamental	one?	Where	is	this	book's	primeval	torment?	Where	are	you,	oh,
primeval	mother	of	all	torments?	The	longer	I	probe,	study,	and	digest	these
things,	the	clearer	it	becomes	that	the	chief,	basic	torment,	as	I	see	it,	is	simply
the	torment	of	bad	form,	of	bad	
exterieur,	
or,	in	other	words,	it's	the	torment	of
platitude,	grimace,	face,	mug—yes,	that's	the	source,	the	wellspring,	the
beginning,	and	it's	from	here	that	all	other	suffering,	frenzy,	and	torture	flow
harmoniously,	without	exception.	Or	perhaps	one	should	really	say	that	the	chief,
basic	torment	is	nothing	other	than	the	suffering	that	comes	from	our	being
constricted	by	another	human	being,	from	the	fact	that	we	are	strangled	and
stifled	by	a	tight,	narrow,	stiff	notion	of	ourselves	that	is	held	by	another	human
being.	Or,	perhaps	at	the	base	of	this	book	is	the	major	and	murderous	torment	of
the	not quite human	greenery,	of	little	sprouts,	leaves,	and	buds	or	the	torment	of
development	and	not quite development,	or	maybe	the	suffering	of	not quite 
shaping,	not quite forming,	or	the	torment	of	our	inner	self	being	created	by
others,	or	the	torment	of	physical	and	psychological	rape	the	suffering	of
driving,	interpersonal	tensions	the	biased	and	unclarified	torment	of
psychological	bias	the	lateral	torture	of	psychological	wrenching,	twisting,	andmiscuing	the	unceasing	torment	of	betrayal,	the	torment	of	falsehood	the
mechanical	agony	of	mechanism	and	automatism	the	symmetrical	torment	of
analogy,	and	the	analogous	torment	of	symmetry	the	analytical	torment	of
synthesis,	and	the	synthetic	torment	of	analysis	or	maybe	the	agony	of	parts	of
the	body	and	the	disruption	of	the	hierarchy	of	its	individual	organs	or	the
suffering	of	gentle	infantilism	of	the	pupa,	of	pedagogy,	of	formalists	and
educators	of	inconsolable	innocence	and	naivete	of	departure	from	reality	of
phantasm,	illusion,	musings,	idle	notions,	and	nonsense	of	higher	idealism	of
lower,	shabby,	hole in the corner	idealism	of	daydreaming	on	the	sidelines	or
maybe	of	the	very	odd	torment	of	pettiness	and	belittlement	the	torment	of
contending	the	torment	of	aspiring	the	torment	of	apprenticeship	or	perhaps
simply	the	torture	of	pulling	oneself	up	by	one's	bootstraps	and	straining	beyond
one's	ability,	and	hence	the	torture	of	inability,	general	and	particular	the	agony
of	giving	oneself	airs,	and	of	blowing	one's	own	horn	the	pain	of	humiliating
others	the	torment	of	superior	and	inferior	poetry	or	the	torture	of	the	dull
psychological	impasse	the	devious	torture	of	craftiness,	evasiveness,	and	of	foul
play	or	rather	the	torture	of	the	age	in	its	particular	and	general	sense	the	torment
of	the	old fashioned	the	torment	of	modernity	the	suffering	resulting	from	the
emergence	of	new	social	strata	the	torment	of	the	semi intelligent	the	torment	of
the	nonintelligent	the	torture	of	the	intelligent	or	maybe	simply	the	torment	of
petty intelligent	indecency	the	pain	of	stupidity	of	wisdom	of	ugliness	of	beauty,
of	attractiveness	and	charm	or	maybe	the	torture	of	cutthroat	logic,	and	of
consistency	in	foolishness	the	anguish	of	reciting	the	despair	of	imitating	the
boring	torture	of	boredom,	and	of	talking	in	circles	or	perhaps	the	hypomanic
torment	of	hypomania	the	ineffable	torture	of	ineffability	the	aching	lack	of
sublimation	of	pain	in	the	finger	in	the	fingernail	of	toothache	of	earache	the
torture	of	horrifying	interrelation,	interdependence,	and	dependence,	of
interpenetration	of	all	torments	and	of	all	parts,	and	the	torment	of	one	hundred
and	fifty six	thousand,	three	hundred	and	twenty four	and	a	half	other	tortures,
not	counting	women	and	children,	as	an	old	French	author	of	the	sixteenth
century	would	have	said.
Which	of	those	tortures	is	to	be	the	basic	primeval	torture,	which	part	is	the
integral,	by	which	of	its	parts	is	one	to	seize	this	book,	and	what	should	one	pick
from	the	above	parts	and	torments?	Oh,	accursed	parts,	will	I	ever	be	free	of	you,
oh,	what	an	abundance	of	parts,	what	an	abundance	of	torments!	Where	is	the
chief,	primeval	mother,	and	should	the	basis	for	the	torment	be	metaphysical	or
physical,	sociological	or	psychological?	And	yet	I	must,	I	must	and	I	cannot	not,because	the	world	at	large	is	about	to	consider	me	unconscious	of	my	goals	and
to	think	that	I've	lost	my	bearings.	But	perhaps,	in	this	case,	it	would	be	more
rational	to	develop	and	bring	out	the	genesis	of	the	work	with	words,	and	not	on
the	basis	of	torments,	but	in	the	face	of,	with	regard	to,	in	relation	to	that	it	arose:
in	relation	to	pedagogues	and	schoolboys	in	the	face	of	half witted	wise	guys
with	reference	to	deep	or	high level	beings	with	regard	to	the	leading	writers	of
contemporary	national	literature,	and	the	most	polished,	structured,	and	rigid
representatives	of	the	world	of	criticism	in	the	face	of	schoolgirls	in	relation	to
the	mature,	and	to	men	of	the	world	in	interdependence	with	men	of	fashion,
dandies,	narcissists,	aesthetes,	haughty	spirits,	and	men	about	town	with	regard
to	those	experienced	in	life	in	bondage	to	cultural	aunts	in	relation	to	urban
citizens	in	the	face	of	the	country	citizenry	with	reference	to	petty	physicians	in
the	provinces,	engineers	and	civil	servants	of	narrow	horizons	with	reference	to
high level	civil	servants,	physicians	and	lawyers	of	wide	horizons	in	relation	to
ancestral	and	other	kinds	of	aristocracy	in	the	face	of	the	rabble.
It's	also	possible,	however,	that	my	work	was	conceived	out	of	torment	from
associating	with	an	actual	person,	for	example,	with	the	distinctly	repulsive	Mr.
XY,	or	with	Mr.	Z,	whom	I	hold	in	utmost	contempt,	and	NN,	who	bores	and
wearies	me—oh,	the	terrible	torment	of	associating	with	them!	And—it's
possible—that	the	motive	and	goal	for	writing	this	book	is	solely	to	show	these
gentlemen	my	disdain	for	them,	to	agitate,	irritate,	and	enrage	them,	and	to	get
them	out	of	my	way.	In	this	case	the	motive	would	seem	to	be	clear cut,
personal,	and	aimed	at	the	individual.
But	perhaps	my	work	came	from	imitating	masterworks?
From	inability	to	create	a	normal	work?
From	dreams?
From	complexes?
Or	perhaps	from	memories	of	my	childhood?
and	perhaps	because	I	began	writing	and	so	it	happened	to	come	out	From
anxiety	disorder?
From	obsessive compulsive	disorder?
Perhaps	from	a	bubble?
From	a	pinch	of	something?
From	a	part?
From	a	particle?From	thin	air?
One	would	also	need	to	establish,	proclaim,	and	define	whether	the	work	is	a
novel,	a	memoir,	a	parody,	a	lampoon,	a	variation	on	a	fantasy,	or	a	study	of
some	kind—and	what	prevails	in	it:	humor,	irony,	or	some	deeper	meaning,
sarcasm,	persiflage,	invective,	rubbish,	
pur	nonsens,	pur	claptrapism,	
and	more,
whether	it's	simply	a	pose,	pretense,	make believe,	bunkum,	artificiality,	paucity
of	wit,	anemia	of	emotion,	atrophy	of	imagination,	subversion	of	order,	and
ruination	of	the	mind.	Yet	the	sum	of	these	possibilities,	torments,	definitions,
and	parts	is	so	limitless,	so	unfathomable	and	inexhaustible	that	one	must	say,
with	the	greatest	responsibility	for	one's	words	and	after	the	most	scrupulous
consideration,	that	we	know	nothing,	chirp,	chirp,	little	chickie;	and
consequently,	whoever	would	like	to	better	understand,	to	gain	deeper	insight,	I
invite	him	to	read	"The	Child	Runs	Deep	in	Filibert,"	because	my	answer	to	all
these	tormenting	questions	lies	in	its	hidden	symbolism.	Because	Filibert,
positioned	conclusively	and	in	analogy	with	Filidor,	conceals	within	its	strange
unity	the	final,	secret	meaning	of	this	work.	And	having	thus	revealed	it,	there	is
nothing	to	stop	one	from	venturing	somewhat	deeper,	into	the	thicket	of	those
separate	and	tedious	parts.12	The	Child	Runs	Deep	in	Filibert
At	the	end	of	the	eighteenth	century	a	peasant	in	Paris	had	a	child,	and	this	child
had	a	child,	then	this	child	had	a	child,	which	had	a	child;	and	this	last	child
played	a	tennis	match	as	the	world	champion	on	the	court	of	the	illustrious	Paris
Racing	Club,	in	an	atmosphere	of	great	excitement	and	to	the	accompaniment	of
unceasing	and	thunderous	applause.	However	(oh,	how	incredibly	treacherous
life	can	be!),	a	certain	colonel	of	the	
Zouaves,	
sitting	in	the	crowd	on	the	side
bleachers,	suddenly	became	envious	of	the	two	champions'	impeccable	and
thrilling	game,	and	wishing	to	show	off	in	front	of	the	six	thousand	spectators
(and	especially	in	front	of	his	fiancée,	sitting	next	to	him)	unexpectedly	fired	his
pistol	and	hit	the	ball	in	midair.
{10}
	The	ball	burst	and	fell	to	the	ground	while	the
champions,	so	suddenly	deprived	of	their	object,	continued	to	swing	their	rackets
in	empty	space;	however,	realizing	the	nonsense	of	their	movements	now	that
the	ball	was	gone,	they	pounced	on	each	other	with	their	claws.	A	thunderous
applause	rose	from	the	spectators.
And	this	surely	would	have	been	the	end.	But	something	else	happened—the
colonel,	in	his	excitement,	forgot	or	did	not	take	into	consideration	(oh,	how
careful	one	must	be!)	the	spectators	sitting	on	the	other	side	of	the	court,	on	the
so called	sunny	side	of	the	stands.	He	thought,	God	knows	why,	that	the	bullet,
having	punctured	the	ball,	would	have	spent	itself;	however,	in	its	further
trajectory	it	unfortunately	struck	a	ship	owner	in	the	neck.	Blood	spurted	from	a
ruptured	artery.	The	wife	of	the	wounded	man,	on	first	impulse,	wanted	to
pounce	on	the	colonel	and	snatch	the	pistol	from	him,	but	since	she	couldn't	(she
was	trapped	in	the	crowd),	she	simply	slapped	the	mug	of	her	neighbor	on	her
right.	And	she	did	it	because	she	couldn't	vent	her	agitation	in	any	other	way,
and	because,	in	the	deepest	recesses	of	her	inner	self	and	motivated	by	purely
feminine	logic	she	thought	that,	as	a	woman,	she	was	at	liberty	to	do	so,	and	why
not?	Not	so,	as	it	turned	out	(oh,	how	unceasingly	one	must	take	everything	into
account),	because	the	man	was	a	latent	epileptic	who,	due	to	the	psychological
shock	of	the	slap	in	the	face,	went	into	a	seizure	and	erupted	like	a	geyser	in
jerks	and	convulsions.	The	hapless	woman	found	herself	between	two	men,	one
spurting	blood,	the	other	foam.	A	thunderous	applause	rose	from	the	spectators.
Whereupon	a	gentleman	sitting	nearby	suddenly	panicked	and	jumped	on	the
head	of	the	lady	seated	below,	she	in	turn	took	off	and,	carrying	him	on	her	back
at	full	speed,	bounded	into	the	center	of	the	court.	A	thunderous	applause	rose
from	the	spectators.	And	this	surely	would	have	been	the	end.	But	somethingelse	happened	(oh,	how	one	must	always	anticipate	everything!)—a	modest
pensioner	from	Toulouse,	a	man	given	to	dreaming	in	secret,	sat	relaxing	not	far
off,	and,	for	a	long	time	and	at	every	public	event,	he	had	been	dreaming	of
jumping	onto	the	heads	of	people	sitting	below	him,	yet,	by	sheer	willpower,	he
had	thus	far	restrained	himself.	Now,	carried	away	by	the	example,	he	instantly
mounted	a	woman	sitting	below	him,	and	she	(a	minor	office	clerk	from
Tangiers),	surmising	that	these	must	be	proper	city	manners	and	quite	the	thing
to	do—also	carried	him	on	her	back,	taking	pains	to	make	her	movements	appear
totally	relaxed.
Whereupon	the	more	sophisticated	sector	of	the	public	began	to	applaud
tactfully	so	as	to	cover	up	the	gaffe	in	front	of	the	delegates	from	foreign
consulates	and	embassies	who	had	thronged	to	the	match.	But	this	led	to	yet
another	misunderstanding,	because	the	less	sophisticated	sector	mistook	the
applause	for	a	sign	of	approval,	and	they	too	mounted	their	ladies.	The
foreigners	showed	increasing	astonishment.	So	what	could	the	more
sophisticated	sector	of	the	company	do?	As	if	nothing	had	happened,	they	too
mounted	their	ladies.
And	this	almost	certainly	would	have	been	the	end.	But	then	a	certain	marquis
de	Filiberthe,	sitting	in	the	grandstand	with	his	wife	and	her	family,	was
suddenly	roused	by	the	gentleman	within	and	stepped	into	the	center	of	the	court
in	his	light colored	summer	suit	and,	pale	yet	determined,	he	coolly	asked	if
anyone,	and	if	so	who,	wished	to	insult	his	wife,	the	marquise	de	Filiberthe?	And
he	threw	into	the	crowd	a	bunch	of	visiting	cards	inscribed:	Phillipe	Hertal	de
Filiberthe.	(Oh,	how	terribly	careful	we	must	be!	How	difficult	and	treacherous
life	is,	and	how	unpredictable!)	Dead	silence	ensued.
And	suddenly	no	fewer	than	thirty six	gentlemen	began	riding	up	at	a	slow
canter,	bareback	on	their	elegantly	and	ornately	dressed	women—thoroughbred
and	slim	at	the	fetlocks—to	insult	the	marquise	de	Filiberthe	and	to	feel
themselves	roused	by	the	gentleman	within,	just	as	her	husband	the	marquis
himself	had	been	roused	by	the	gentleman	within.	Panic stricken,	the	marquise
miscarried—and	a	child's	whimpering	was	heard	at	the	marquis'	feet	and	under
the	hooves	of	the	trampling	women.	The	marquis—so	unexpectedly	made	aware
of	the	child	that	ran	deep	in	him,	and	realizing,	just	at	that	moment	when	he	was
acting	singly	and	as	a	gentleman	mature	within	himself,	how	sustained	and
replenished	he	had	been	by	the	child—was	overcome	with	embarrassment	and
went	home—while	a	thunderous	applause	rose	from	the	spectators.13	The	Farmhand,	or	Captive	Again
And	so	we're	off,	Kneadus	and	I,	in	search	of	the	farmhand.	The	villa	had
disappeared	around	the	corner	with	what ever	remained	of	the	Youngbloods
tumbling	and	rolling	about	as	we	had	left	them,	and	ahead	of	us	lay	the	long
stretch	of	Filtrowa	Street,	a	shining	ribbon.	The	sun	rose,	a	yellow	ball,	we're
eating	breakfast	at	a	drugstore,	the	city	is	awakening,	it's	eight	o'clock,	we	move
on,	I	with	my	small	suitcase,	Kneadus	with	a	walking	stick.	Little	birds	chirp	on
trees.	Onward,	onward!	Kneadus	stomps	briskly,	hope	carries	him	into	the
future,	his	hope	heartens	me,	his	captive!	"Let's	go	to	the	outskirts	of	the	city,	to
the	outskirts,"	he	keeps	repeating.	"We'll	find	ourselves	a	swell	farmhand	there,
that's	where	we'll	find	him!"	The	farmhand	paints	the	morning	in	bright	and
pleasant	colors,	it's	nice,	it's	great	fun	to	walk	through	the	city	in	search	of	a
farmhand!	What	will	become	of	me?	What	will	they	do	with	me?	Under	what
circumstances?	I	know	nothing,	I	stomp	briskly	behind	Kneadus,	my	lord	and
master,	I	can't	torture	myself	nor	be	sad	because	I'm	in	a	good	mood!	In	this
neighborhood	the	entrances	to	buildings	are	few	and	far	between,	and	the	air	in
them	reeks	of	janitors	and	their	families.	Kneadus	peeks	into	each	doorway,	but	a
janitor	is	a	far	cry	from	a	farmhand,	isn't	a	janitor	just	a	peasant	in	a	flowerpot?
Here	and	there	we	run	into	a	janitor's	son,	but	Kneadus	is	not	satisfied,	because
isn't	a	janitor's	son	actually	a	farmhand	in	a	cage,	a	farmhand	caged	in	a
stairwell?	"There's	no	wind	here,"	he	declares.	"In	these	doorways	there	are	only
drafts,	and	I	don't	fancy	a	farmhand	in	drafts,	for	me	a	farmhand	lives	where	the
wind	blows	free."
We	pass	nannies	and	nursemaids	pushing	infants	in	squeaking	baby	carriages.
Wearing	their	mistresses'	discarded	dresses,	they	walk	on	heels	bent	out	of
shape,	giving	us	the	glad	eye.	Two	gold	teeth,	wheeling	someone	else's	child,	in
tatters,	Rudolph	Valentino	in	their	heads.	We	pass	executives,	office	workers
with	briefcases	under	their	arms	hurrying	to	their	daily	tasks,	but	they're	all	
of
papier	mâché,	
very	Slavic	and	bureaucratic,	their	cuffs	and	cufflinks	like
emblems	of	their	egos,	each	has	his	own	watch	chain,	these	husbands	of	wives
and	employers	of	nursemaids.	Above	them	the	great	Sky.	We	pass	young	la di 
das	wearing	coats	in	Warsaw	chic,	some	skinny	and	swift,	others	sluggish	and
soft,	their	heads	stuck	into	their	very	own	hats,	and,	without	much	to
differentiate	them,	they	catch	up	and	pass	one	another,	Kneadus	won't	even
deign	to	look,	and	I'm	thoroughly	bored,	I	begin	to	yawn.	"To	the	outskirts,"	he
exclaims,	"there	we'll	find	a	farmhand,	nothing	doing	here,	it's	all	so	cheap,they're	a	dime	a	dozen,	intelligentsia	cows	and	horses,	attorneys'	wives	and
nannies,	their	husbands	are	like	cab	horses.	Damn	them	all,	cows	and	mules!
Look	how	educated	and	yet	how	stupid	they	are!	All	overdressed,	damn	it,	and
so	vulgar!	It's	the	pupa,	the	damn	pupa	again!"	At	the	end	of	Wawelska	Street	we
see	some	municipal	buildings	planned	on	a	grander	scale,	their	formidable
appearance	passes	as	nourishment	for	the	masses	of	hungry	and	exhausted
employees.	The	buildings	remind	us	of	school,	so	we	quicken	our	pace.	On
Narutowicz	Square,	where	the	students'	dormitory	is	located,	we	run	into	bands
of	students,	bleary eyed	from	lack	of	sleep,	their	trousers	frayed,	their	hair
unkempt,	hurrying	to	a	lecture	or	waiting	for	a	streetcar.	Their	noses	in	their
lecture	notes,	they	eat	hard boiled	eggs,	shove	the	eggshells	into	their	pockets,
and	breathe	the	dust	of	the	big	city.	"Pah,	these	are	ex farmhands!"	he
exclaimed.	"They're	all	sons	of	peasants	studying	to	become	intelligentsia!	To
hell	with	ex farmhands!	I	hate	ex farmhands!	They	still	wipe	their	noses	with
their	fingers,	and	already	they're	studying	their	lecture	notes!	Learning	in	a
peasant!	A	peasant	turned	lawyer	or	physician!	Just	look	how	their	heads	are
swollen	with	Latin	terms,	look	at	their	stubby	fingers!	How	unfortunate,"	fumed
Kneadus,	"that's	just	as	bad	as	if	they'd	become	monks!	Oh,	so	many	good,	first 
rate	farmhands,	but	nothing	doing,	they've	changed	their	garb,	they've	been
murdered,	killed!	To	the	outskirts	of	the	city,	to	the	outskirts,	there's	wind	there,
the	air	blows	free!"	We	turn	into	Grojecka	Street,	dust,	soot,	noise,	and	stench,
no	more	brownstone	buildings,	only	tenement	houses	and	preposterous	carts
with	Jewish	goods	and	chattels,	carts	full	of	vegetables,	goose	down,	milk,
cabbage,	grain,	hay,	scrap	metal,	and	debris,	they	fill	the	street	with	their
jingling,	clanging,	and	banging.	On	top	of	every	cart	sits	a	peasant	or	a	Jew,
wobbling—either	a	city	peasant	or	a	country	Jew—I	don't	know	which	is	better.
We	actually	venture	farther	into	the	inferior	regions,	the	immature	outskirts	of
the	city,	and	there	are	more	decayed	teeth,	more	ears	stuffed	with	wads	of	cotton
wool,	fingers	bound	in	rags,	hair	smeared	with	grease,	hiccups,	blackheads,
cabbage,	and	a	pervasive	musty	stench.	Diapers	dry	in	the	windows.	Radios
rattle	on	without	a	break,	educational	talk	whirrs,	and	numerous	Pimkos,	with	a
voice	that's	either	artificially	naive	and	warm,	or	gruff	or	cheery,	educate	the	soul
of	drugstore	owners,	lecturing	them	on	their	responsibilities	and	teaching	them
to	love	Kosciuszko.	Grocers	relish	reading	tabloids	that	describe	the	life	of	the
upper	classes,	and	their	wives,	scratching	themselves	on	the	back,	relive	their
previous	night	with	Marlene	Dietrich.	Pedagogical	activity	is	in	full	swing,
innumerable	female	delegates	bustle	among	the	populace,	teaching	andlecturing,	persuading	and	developing,	awakening	and	generating	civic 
mindedness	with	an	
ad	hoc	
simplicity	pasted	on	their	faces.	Here	a	group	of
streetcar	conductors'	wives	dances	in	a	circle,	singing	and	smiling	and	promoting
joy	of	life	under	the	direction	of	a	person	delegated	for	this	purpose,	an
especially	cheerful	wag	from	the	intelligentsia,	there	horse cab	drivers	sing
canticles,	thus	creating	a	strange	sense	of	innocence.	Somewhere	else,	ex 
farmgirls	are	learning	to	discover	the	beauty	of	a	sunset.	And	tens	of	concep 
tualists,	dogmatists,	demagogues,	and	agitators	shape	and	reshape	people,
sowing	their	ideas,	opinions,	doctrines,	concepts—all	specially	prepared	and
simplified	for	the	"little	ones."	"The	mug,	the	mug	everywhere,"	said	Kneadus
abruptly,	"just	like	in	school!	No	wonder	disease	eats	them	alive,	poverty	chokes
them,	no	wonder	this	motley	crew	is	being	choked	and	eaten	alive.	Who	the
devil	fixed	them	like	this—I'm	sure	if	someone	hadn't	put	them	up	to	it,	they
wouldn't	have	spawned	all	this	ugliness,	abomination,	and	filth,	it	sticks	out	a
mile,	why	doesn't	it	stick	out	of	a	peasant,	even	though	he	never	washes	himself!
Who,	I	ask,	has	turned	this	good	and	respectable	proletariat	into	such	a	factory?
Who	has	taught	them	this	filth	and	quirkiness?	Oh,	Sodom	and	Gomorrah—we'll
never	find	a	farmhand	here.	Let's	go	on,	on.	When	will	the	wind	finally	blow?"
But	there	is	no	wind,	only	stagnation,	human	beings	wallowing	in	their	humanity
like	fish	in	a	pond.	The	stench	hits	the	sky,	and	still	the	farmhand	is	nowhere	to
be	seen.	Lonely	seamstresses	get	skinny,	petty	hairdressers	grow	plump	in	cheap
luxury,	minor	craftsmen's	stomachs	growl,	unemployed	female	servants	on	their
short,	fat	legs	spout	vile	language,	artificial	phrases,	pretentious	accents,	and	the
pharmacist's	wife—her	stomach	growling—lords	it	over	the	washerwoman,	the
washerwoman	preens	herself	on	spiked	heels.	Feet	that	are	actually	bare	yet	shod
in	dainty	shoes,	feet	that	seem	odd	when	clad	in	shoes,	likewise	their	heads	in
hats,	bodies	from	the	country	or	some	village	in	gents'	and	ladies'	outfits.	"What
a	mug,"	said	Kneadus,	"nothing	sincere,	nothing	natural,	everything	copied,
trashy,	fake,	bogus."	And	the	farmhand	is	still	nowhere	to	be	seen.	Finally	we
come	upon	a	journeyman,	not	bad,	a	nice,	fair haired,	well proportioned	man,
but	unfortunately	already	enlightened	about	social	class	and	echoing	Marx.
"What	a	mug,"	said	Kneadus,	"what	a	philosopher!"	Yet	another	one—a	typical
rogue,	knife	between	his	teeth,	a	smart	aleck	from	these	seedy	outskirts—
seemed	for	a	moment	to	be	the	longed for	farmhand,	but	unfortunately	he	wore	a
bowler	hat.	Another	type	we	approached	on	a	street	corner	seemed	to	suit
Kneadus	to	a	"T,"	but,	alas,	he	used	the	expression	"whereas."	"Yet	another
mug,"	Kneadus	whispered	furiously,	"he's	no	good.	Onward,	onward,"	herepeated	feverishly,	"all	this	is	trash.	Just	like	in	our	school.	The	outskirts	are
taking	lessons	from	the	city.	Damn	it,	the	lower	classes	are	actually	at	grade 
school	level.	These	fellows	are	just	entry level	pupils,	that's	probably	why	their
noses	are	still	dripping.	Devil	take	all	that	mangy,	scabby	lot,	will	we	ever
escape	school?	Nothing	but	the	mug.	Oh,	the	mug,	mug,	mug!	Onward,
onward!"	We	move	on,	on,	small	wooden	houses,	mothers	delousing	their
daughters,	daughters—their	mothers,	children	wading	in	gutters,	workers
returning	from	work,	the	great	one	and	only	word	resounds	from	on	high	and
from	below,	the	entire	street	is	full	of	it	by	now,	it's	transforming	itself	into	a	real
hymn	of	the	proletariat,	it	resounds	with	challenge	and	arrogance,	it	is	hurled
with	passion	into	space	and	provides	at	least	an	illusion	of	life	and	power.	"Look
at	them!"	Kneadus	marveled,	"look	how	they	puff	themselves	up,	just	like	we	do
in	school.	That	won't	cure	the	pupa,	that	great	and	classical	pupa,	which	has	been
stuck	on	these	sniveling	brats.	It's	terrible	that	there's	no	one	nowadays	who	isn't
still	at	the	age	of	immaturity.	Onward—there's	no	farmhand	here!"	And	just	as
he	finished	saying	these	words	a	breeze	blew	gently	on	our	cheeks,	there	were
no	more	houses,	streets,	gutters,	sewers,	hairdressers,	windows,	workers,	wives,
mothers	and	daughters,	vermin,	cabbage,	stuffy	air,	cramped	spaces,	dust,
proprietors,	artisans,	shoes,	blouses,	hats,	heels,	streetcars,	shops,	vegetables,
smart	alecks,	shop	signs,	blackheads,	stuff,	glances,	hair,	eyebrows,	lips,
sidewalks,	bellies,	tools,	organs,	hiccups,	knees,	elbows,	windowpanes,	shouts,
sniveling,	spitting,	throat	clearing,	conversations,	children,	clatter.	We	came	to
the	city	limits.	Ahead	of	us—fields,	forests.	A	highway.	Kneadus	started	singing:
"Hey,	hey,	a	forest	green	Hey,	hey,	a	forest	green!
Pick	up	a	stick.	Cut	a	branch	for	yourself.	In	the	fields—that's	where	we'll	find	a
farmhand!	I	can	already	see	him	in	my	mind's	eye.	Not	bad,	that	farmhand!"	I
sang:
"Hey,	hey,	a	forest	green	Hey,	hey,	a	forest	green!"
Yet	I	couldn't	take	another	step	forward.	The	song	died	on	my	lips.	Space.	On
the	horizon—a	cow.	Earth.	In	the	distance	a	goose	flies	by.	The	sky	is	enormous.
In	the	mist	the	horizon	is	blue gray.	I	stopped	at	the	city	limits,	and	I	felt	that	I
couldn't	continue	without	the	herd	and	its	works,	without	the	human	among
humans.	I	caught	Kneadus	by	the	hand.	"Don't	go	there,	Kneadus,	let's	turn	back,
don't	leave	the	city,	Kneadus."	Among	unfamiliar	bushes	and	grasses	I	shook
like	a	leaf	in	the	wind,	I	felt	deprived	of	people,	and	the	deformities	inflicted
upon	me	by	them	seemed	nonsensical	and	unjustified	without	them.	Kneadus
also	hesitated,	but	the	prospect	of	finding	a	farmhand	overcame	his	fear."Onward!"	he	called,	brandishing	his	stick.	"I	won't	go	alone!	You	must	come
with	me!	Let's	go,	let's	go!"	The	wind	came	up,	trees	swayed,	leaves	rustled,	and
one	leaf	especially—at	the	top	of	a	tree	and	ruthlessly	exposed	to	space—
terrified	me.	A	bird	soared	high	above.	A	dog	bolted	from	the	city	and	tore
across	the	black	fields.	Yet	Kneadus	moved	boldly	down	a	path	along	the
highway—and	I	followed	him,	as	if	in	a	boat	under	way	to	the	open	sea.	Land
disappears,	and	so	do	the	chimneys	and	spires,	we're	alone.	Silence,	one	can
almost	hear	the	cold	and	slippery	stones	sticking	out	of	the	ground.	I	move	on,	I
no	longer	know	anything,	the	wind	blows	in	my	ears,	I	sway	to	the	rhythm	of
walking	.	.	.	Nature.	I	don't	want	nature,	people	are	nature	for	me,	Kneadus,	let's
turn	back,	I	prefer	crowds	in	a	movie	house	to	ozone	in	the	fields.	Who	said	that
in	relation	to	nature	man	becomes	small?	On	the	contrary,	I	grow	and	assume
gigantic	proportions,	yet	I	weaken,	I	feel	naked,	as	if	served	up	on	a	platter	of
huge	fields	of	nature	in	all	my	human	unnaturalness,	oh,	where	did	my	forest
disappear,	my	thicket	of	eyes	and	lips,	of	words,	glances,	faces,	smiles,	and
grimaces?	A	different	forest	approaches,	a	forest	of	evergreens,	below	which	a
hare	scampers	and	a	caterpillar	crawls.	Yet	here,	as	if	out	of	spite,	not	a	village	in
sight,	the	road	passes	through	fields	and	forests.	I	don't	know	how	many	hours
we	trudged	awkwardly	across	the	fields,	stiffly,	as	if	on	a	tightrope—there	was
nothing	else	we	could	do,	because	standing	would	tire	us	even	more,	and	we
could	neither	sit	nor	lie	on	the	damp,	cold	earth.	We	passed	a	couple	of	villages,
but	they	looked	dead—boarded up	cottages	with	empty	eye	sockets.	There	was
no	more	traffic	on	the	highway.	How	long	were	we	to	tramp	through	this
emptiness?
"What's	the	meaning	of	this?"	asked	Kneadus.	"Has	plague	descended	on	the
peasants?	Are	they	all	dead?	If	this	continues	we'll	never	find	the	farmhand."
Finally,	coming	upon	yet	another	deserted	village,	we	began	knocking	on	the
doors	of	the	cottages.	Ferocious	barking	answered	us,	as	if	a	pack	of	wild	dogs,
from	huge	mastiffs	to	small	mongrels,	were	sharpening	their	teeth	to	attack	us.
"What	is	this?"	Kneadus	asked.	"Where	do	all	these	dogs	come	from?	Why	are
there	no	peasants	here?	Pinch	me,	I	must	be	dreaming	..."	His	words	hardly	had
time	to	dissolve	in	the	limpid	air,	when,	from	a	nearby	potato	pit,	a	peasant's
head	popped	up	and	immediately	hid	again,	and	when	we	came	closer,	ferocious
barking	came	from	the	hollow.	"Damn	it,"	Kneadus	said,	"dogs	again?	Where's
the	peasant?"	We	walked	round	the	pit	(in	the	meantime	outright	howling	came
from	the	cottages),	and	we	flushed	out	the	peasant	and	his	wife	with	little
quadruplets	whom	she	had	been	nursing	with	one	almost	dried up	breast	(sincethe	other	had	long	been	useless),	barking	desperately	and	furiously.	They	broke
into	a	run,	but	Kneadus	sprang	and	caught	the	peasant.	The	latter	was	so
emaciated	and	skinny	that	he	fell	to	the	ground	and	moaned:	"Oh,	lordie,	lord,
have	me'cy	on	us,	let	us	be,	leave	us	alone,	oh,	sire!"	"Look,	mister,"	said
Kneadus,	"what's	the	matter	with	you?	Why	are	you	hiding	from	us?"	At	the
sound	of	the	word	"mister,"	the	barking	in	the	cottages	and	down	the	paths	by
the	fences	redoubled,	and	the	poor	little	peasant	turned	white	as	a	sheet.	"Oh,
have	me'cy,	sire,	I'm	no	mister,	le'	me	be!"	"Citizen,"	Kneadus	replied	in	a
conciliatory	tone,	"are	you	crazy?	Why	are	you	barking,	you	and	your	wife?	We
have	good	intentions."	At	the	sound	of	"citizen,"	the	barking	tripled,	and	the
peasant	woman	broke	out	wailing:	"Have	pity,	sire,	he's	no	citizen!	They've	sent
us	some	Yententions	again,	damn	them!"	"Friend,"	Kneadus	said,	"what's	the
matter?	We're	not	going	to	hurt	you.	We	want	nothing	but	your	good."	"Friend!"
exclaimed	the	peasant,	terrified.	"He	wants	our	good!"	screamed	the	woman.
"We're	no	human	folk,	we're	just	dogs,	we're	dogs!	Woof!	Woof!"	Suddenly	the
baby	at	the	breast	barked,	the	peasant	woman	looked	around	and,	realizing	that
there	were	only	two	of	us,	growled	and	bit	me	in	the	belly.	I	tore	my	belly	out	of
the	hag's	teeth!	But	now	from	behind	the	fences	all	the	villagers	appeared,
barking	and	growling:	"Get	'em,	boys!	Don't	be	scared!	Bite	'em!	Snap!	Snap!
Set	the	dogsss	on	them!	Git	those	yententions!	Git	those	yentelligentsias!	Sock	it
to	'em,	sock	'em,	set	dogsss	on	'em,	cats	too,	cats!	Ksss...	Ksss	..."	Thus	setting
upon	us	and	hounding	us,	they	came	closer—what's	worse,	to	draw	attention
away	from	themselves,	or	to	spur	themselves	on,	they	brought	real	dogs	on
ropes,	and	the	dogs	stood	on	their	haunches,	jumping,	saliva	dribbling	from	their
snouts,	barking	ferociously.	Our	situation	became	critical,	even	more	from	the
psychological	standpoint	than	the	physical.	It	was	six	o'clock	in	the	evening.	It
was	getting	dark,	the	sun	was	behind	the	clouds,	it	was	beginning	to	drizzle,
while	we—in	an	unfamiliar	territory,	a	cold,	fine	rain	falling—were	faced	with	a
huge	number	of	peasants	pretending	to	be	dogs	so	they	could	dodge	the	all 
encompassing	activity	of	the	city	intelligentsia.	Their	children	could	no	longer
speak	but	barked	on	all	fours,	their	parents	encouraging	them:	"Barkie,	barkie,
sonny,	little	Spot,	so	they'll	leave	you	in	peace,	barkie,	barkie,	Spottie dog."	This
was	the	first	time	I	had	ever	observed	a	whole	village	hurriedly	transforming
itself	into	dogs	on	the	strength	of	the	law	of	mimicry	and	out	of	fear	of
humanization,	too	intensely	applied.	And	it	was	impossible	to	defend	ourselves
because	it's	one	thing	to	defend	yourself	from	one	dog	or	one	peasant,	but	quite
another	to	defend	yourself	from	growling,	barking	peasantry	wanting	to	bite	you.Kneadus	drops	the	stick	out	of	his	hand.	I	look	vacuously	at	the	slippery,
mysterious	turf	ahead	of	me,	where	I'm	about	to	give	up	the	ghost,	and	under
such	feigned	circumstances.	Farewell	my	body	parts.	Farewell	my	mug,	and
farewell,	too,	my	docile	pupa!
And	we	surely	would	have	been,	on	this	very	spot,	devoured	in	some	unknown
manner,	when	suddenly	everything	changes,	the	horn	of	a	car	resounds,	a	car
drives	into	the	crowd	and	stops,	my	aunt	Hurlecka,	née	Lin,	sees	me	and	calls
out:
"Joey!	What	are	you	doing	here,	child?"
Unaware	of	the	danger	and	as	usual	not	noticing	anything,	my	aunt,	swathed	in
shawls,	gets	out	of	the	car	and,	her	arms	outstretched,	rushes	to	kiss	me.	Oh,	no!
It's	auntie!	Auntie!	Where	can	I	hide	from	her?	I	would	prefer	to	be	devoured
than	to	be	hitched	to	Auntie	on	this	great	road	of	my	life.	This	auntie	has	known
me	since	I	was	a	child,	she	has	preserved	the	memory	of	my	little	pants!	She's
seen	me	kicking	my	little	legs	in	my	crib.	So	she	runs	up	to	me,	kisses	me	on	the
forehead,	the	peasants	stop	barking	and	burst	out	laughing,	the	whole	village
shakes	and	roars—they	realize	I'm	not	some	all powerful	city	official,	I'm	just
auntie's	little	boy!	Confusion	takes	over.	Kneadus	takes	off	his	hat	while	auntie
presents	him	her	hand	to	be	kissed.
"Joey,	is	this	your	friend?	My	pleasure."
Kneadus	kisses	auntie's	hand.	I	kiss	auntie's	hand.	My	aunt	asks	if	we	aren't	cold,
where	are	we	going,	where	from,	what	for,	when,	with	whom,	why?"	I	reply
we're	on	a	hike.
"On	a	hike?	But	my	children,	who	has	let	you	out	in	such	damp	weather?	Get
into	the	car,	we'll	go	to	my	place,	to	Bolimov.	Your	uncle	will	be	delighted."
It's	no	use	protesting.	My	auntie	won't	hear	of	any	protests.	On	this	great	road	of
mine,	in	the	mizzly,	spattering	drizzle,	among	rising	mists—we	are	here	with
auntie.	We	get	into	the	car.	The	chauffeur	sounds	the	horn,	the	car	starts,	the
peasants	roar	with	laughter,	the	car,	strung	on	the	line	of	telephone	poles,	gathers
speed—we're	off.	While	my	auntie:	"Well,	Joey,	aren't	you	glad,	here	I	am,	your
second	cousin's	cousin's	aunt	twice	removed,	my	mother	was	your	mother's
second	cousin	twice	removed.	Your	dear	departed	mama!	Dear	Cesia!	It's	so
many	years	since	I've	seen	you.	It's	four	years	now	since	the	Franks'	wedding.	I
remember	how	you	played	in	the	sand remember	the	sand?	What	did	these
people	here	want	from	you?	Oh,	how	they	scare	me!	Today's	peasantry	is	most
uninteresting.	Germs	everywhere,	don't	drink	unboiled	water,	don't	let	unpeeledfruit	pass	your	lips	unless	it	has	been	washed	in	hot	water.	Please	wrap	this
shawl	around	you	or	you'll	hurt	my	feelings,	and	have	your	friend	take	the	other
shawl,	no,	no,	don't	be	cross,	I	could	be	your	friend's	mother.	I'm	sure	his	mama
is	worrying	at	home."	The	driver	honks	the	horn.	The	car	hums,	the	wind	hums,
my	aunt	hums,	utility	poles	and	trees	rush	by,	puny	cottages,	small	towns	like
puddles	rush	by,	birch	and	alder	groves,	clusters	of	firs	rush	by,	the	vehicle
carries	us	swiftly	over	potholes,	we	bounce	in	our	seats.	While	my	auntie:	"Not
too	fast,	Felix,	not	too	fast.	Do	you	remember	uncle	Frank?	Krysia's	getting
married.	Little	Ann	had	whooping	cough.	Henio's	been	drafted	into	the	army.
You	look	pale	and	haggard,	if	you	have	a	toothache	I	have	an	aspirin	here.	And
how's	your	schoolwork—	good?	You	probably	have	talent	for	history	because
your	departed	mother	had	an	amazing	gift	for	history.	You've	inherited	it	from
your	mother.	Also	her	blue	eyes,	your	father's	nose,	your	chin,	however,	is
typical	of	the	Pifczyckis.	And	do	you	remember	how	you	cried	when	they	took
that	apple	core	from	you,	you	stuck	your	little	finger	in	your	mouth	and	cried:
'Tia,	tia,	tia,	here,	appie,	appie,	here!'	(Oh,	accursed	aunt!)	Wait,	wait,	how	many
years	ago	was	that—twenty,	twenty eight,	yes,	it	was	nineteen	hundred	and	...	of
course,	I	used	to	go	to	Vichy	then	and	had	bought	a	green	trunk,	yes,	yes,	that
would	make	you	thirty	now...	Thirty...	yes,	of	course—thirty,	to	be	exact.	Wrap
that	shawl	round	you,	my	child,	one	can't	be	too	careful	of	the	draft."
"Thirty?"	asked	Kneadus.
"Thirty,"	said	my	aunt.	"He	turned	thirty	on	St.	Peter's	and	St.	Paul's!	He's	four
and	a	half	years	younger	than	Terenia,	and	Terenia	is	six	weeks	older	than	Zosia,
Alfred's	daughter.	The	Henryks	were	married	in	February."
"But	Mrs.	Halecka,	he	goes	to	our	school,	same	grade	as	me!"
"That's	right,	it	must	have	been	February	because	it	was	five	months	before	my
trip	to	Mentona,	and	it	was	freezing	weather.	Helenka	died	in	June.	Thirty.
Mama	was	returning	from	Podole.	Thirty.	Exactly	two	years	after	Bolek's
diphtheria.	The	ball	in	Mo gilczany—thirty.	Would	you	like	some	candy?	Joey,
would	you	like	some	candy?	Your	auntie	always	has	candy—remember	how
you'd	stretch	out	your	little	arm	and	call:	'Candy,	auntie!	Candy!'	I	still	carry	the
same	kind	of	candy,	take	some,	take	it,	it's	good	for	a	cough.	Cover	yourself	up,
child."
The	chauffeur	honks.	The	car	speeds	on.	Utility	poles	and	trees	speed	by,	also
cottages,	pieces	of	fences,	pieces	of	checkered	fields,	pieces	of	woods	and
meadows,	pieces	of	unfamiliar	places.	Flatlands.	It's	seven	o'clock.	It's	dark,	thechauffeur	lets	out	beams	of	electricity,	my	aunt	turns	on	the	light	inside	and
offers	me	my	childhood	candy.	Kneadus,	surprised,	sucks	on	a	piece	of	candy,
my	aunt	also	sucks	on	one,	paper	bag	in	hand.	We're	all	sucking.	Tf	I'm	thirty
years	old,	woman,	I'm	thirty—don't	you	understand	that?'	No,	she	doesn't
understand.	She's	too	good.	Too	kind hearted.	It's	nothing	but	kindness.	I'm
drowning	in	auntie's	kindness,	I'm	sucking	on	her	sweet	candy,	and	according	to
her—I'm	still	two	years	old,	and	anyway,	do	I	exist	for	her?	I	don't,	my	hair	is
uncle	Edward's,	my	nose	is	my	father's,	my	eyes	are	my	mother's,	my	chin
belongs	to	the	Pifczyckis,	I'm	a	collection	of	the	family's	body	parts.	Auntie
sinks	into	the	family	and	tucks	the	shawl	around	me.	A	calf	runs	onto	the	road
and	stands,	its	legs	spread	out,	the	chauffeur	sounds	the	horn	like	an	archangel,
but	the	calf	doesn't	want	to	give	way,	the	car	stops	and	the	chauffeur	pushes	the
calf	off	the	road—we	speed	on	while	auntie	tells	how	I	used	to	draw	letters	with
my	finger	on	a	windowpane	when	I	was	ten	years	old.	She	remembers	things	I
don't	remember,	she	knows	me	as	I've	never	known	myself,	but	she's	too	good,	I
can't	kill	her—God	knew	what	he	was	doing	when	he	swathed	in	kindness	every
aunt's	knowledge	of	embarrassing,	amusing	details	of	one's	tear filled,	long gone
childhood.	We	speed	on,	we	enter	a	huge	forest	lit	only	by	our	headlights,
fragments	of	trees	flash	by,	and,	from	my	memory—fragments	of	the	past,	the
area	here	is	evil	and	menacing.	We	are	so	far	from	everything!	Where	are	we?!	A
huge	stretch	of	brutal,	black	countryside,	slippery	from	rain,	dripping	with	water,
surrounds	our	box,	while	within	auntie	prattles	on	about	my	fingers,	that	I	once
cut	my	finger	and	probably	still	carry	a	scar	while	Kneadus,	a	farmhand	in	his
head,	puzzles	over	my	thirty year old.	It	has	started	to	really	rain.	The	car	turns
onto	a	side	road,	up	and	down	through	a	sandy	stretch,	one	more	turn	and	dogs
jump	out,	tough	and	ferocious	mastiffs,	the	night	watchman	runs	out,	chases
them	away—they	growl,	bark,	and	whimper—a	servant	runs	out	onto	the	porch,
another	servant	behind	him.	We	get	out	of	the	car.
Countryside.	The	wind	tears	at	the	trees	and	the	clouds.	In	the	night	the	hazy
outline	of	a	large	building	appears,	it's	not	unfamiliar	to	me—I	know	it—
because	I've	been	here	before,	a	long	time	ago.	Auntie	is	afraid	of	the	damp,	the
servants	lift	her	under	her	armpits	and	help	her	into	the	hallway.	The	chauffeur
lugs	in	heavy	suitcases.	An	old	butler	with	sideburns	takes	off	auntie's	coat.	A
chambermaid	takes	off	my	coat.	A	young	valet	takes	off	Kneadus'	coat.	Little
dogs	sniff	us,	I	know	it	all,	though	I	don't	remember	it...	it	was	here	I	was	born
and	spent	the	first	ten	years	of	my	life.
"I	brought	you	visitors,"	auntie	calls	out.	"Konstanty	dear,	this	is	Ladislas'	son,Ziggie	dear—your	cousin!	Zosia!	Joey—your	cousin.	This	is	Joey,	the	departed
Cesia's	son.	Joey—your	uncle,	Kostie—	Joey."
Shaking	hands,	kissing	on	the	cheeks,	bumping	into	body	parts,	making
declarations	of	joy	and	hospitality,	they	take	us	to	the	living	room,	seat	us	on	old
Biedermeiers,	inquire	about	my	health,	"are	you	well?"—I	inquire	about	their
health	in	turn,	and	conversation	about	various	illnesses	unfolds,	gets	hold	of	us,
and	won't	let	go.	Auntie	has	a	heart	condition,	uncle	Konstanty	has	rheumatism,
Zosia	recently	succumbed	to	anemia	and	she's	prone	to	colds,	her	tonsils	are	not
up	to	snuff,	there's	a	lack	of	means	for	definitive	treatment.	Zygmunt	is	also
prone	to	colds	and	had	an	awful	bout	with	his	ear	as	well,	he	was	exposed	to
drafts	a	month	ago	when	autumn	brought	with	it	winds	and	damp	weather.	That's
enough—it	seemed	unhealthy	to	have	to	listen,	immediately	on	arrival,	to	all	the
illnesses	the	family	has	had,	but	as	soon	as	the	conversation	waned:	
"Sophie,
parle"	
auntie	whispered,	and	Zosia,	to	keep	the	conversation	going,	to	the
detriment	of	her	charms,	pulled	out	other	illnesses.	Sciatica,	rheumatism,
arthritis,	aches	in	the	bones,	gout,	coughs	and	colds,	tonsillitis,	flu,	cancer	and
neurodermatitis,	toothache,	tooth	fillings,	lazy	bowels,	neurasthenia,	liver,
kidneys,	Carlsbad,	Professor	Kalitowicz,	and	Dr.	Pistak.	It	almost	stopped	at
Pistak,	but	no,	to	keep	the	conversation	going,	my	aunt	brings	up	Dr.	Vistak,	that
his	hearing	is	superior	to	Pistak's,	and	back	to	Vistak,	Pistak,	percussion,
diseases	of	the	ear,	of	the	throat,	respiratory	diseases,	heart	valve	insufficiency,
consultations,	gallstones,	chronic	dyspepsia,	asthenia,	and	blood	cells.	I	couldn't
forgive	myself	for	having	asked	about	their	health.	And	yet	I	couldn't	have	not
asked	about	their	health.	Zosia	especially	was	worn	out	by	the	topic,	and	I	saw
how	it	pained	her	to	expose	her	own	scrofula,	just	to	keep	the	conversation
going,	but	it	would	have	been	bad	manners	to	treat	the	newly	arrived	young	men
to	silence.	Was	this	the	usual	mechanism,	was	this	how	they	always	caught
anyone	who	arrived	in	the	countryside,	was	it	never	with	anybody	that	they
began	in	the	countryside,	other	than	through	illnesses?	It	was	a	calamity	for	the
landed	gentry	that	age honored	good	manners	required	them	to	establish
relations	from	a	rheumy	reference	point,	and	that's	why	they	always	looked	so
pale	and	rheumy	in	the	light	of	an	oil	lamp,	little	dogs	on	their	laps.	Oh,
countryside!	Countryside!	The	old	country	manor!	Age old	laws	and	age old
mysteries!	How	different	from	those	of	city	thoroughfares	and	the	crowds	on
Marszalkowska	Street.
It	was	only	my	aunt	who,	out	of	kindness	and	without	being	forced,	wallowed	in
my	uncle's	subfebrile	states	and	bloody	diarrhea.	The	chambermaid,	red faced,wearing	a	little	apron,	came	in	and	turned	up	the	lamp.	Kneadus,	saying	little,
was	impressed	with	the	abundance	of	servants	and	with	the	family's	two	richly
embroidered	sashes	from	Stuck.	There	was	great	nobility	in	all	this—but	I	didn't
know	whether	my	uncle	also	remembered	me	as	a	child.	They	treated	us
somewhat	like	children,	but	they	treated	themselves	similarly,	in	a	kindergarten
style	inherited	from	their	ancestors.	I	had	some	vague	recollection	of	playing
under	a	scratched	table,	and	the	fringe	of	a	worn out	sofa	standing	in	a	corner
loomed	out	of	the	distant	past.	Did	I	chew	on	it,	eat	it,	braid	it—or	more	likely
dip	it	in	a	little	tumbler	and	smear	it—with	what,	when?	Or	maybe	I	stuck	it	in
my	nose?	My	aunt	sat	on	a	sofa	according	to	the	old	school—erect,	bosom	thrust
forward,	head	slightly	back,	Zosia	sat	slumped	and	sickened	by	the	conversation,
her	fingers	intertwined,	Zygmunt,	his	elbows	on	the	arm	rests,	stared	at	the	tips
of	his	shoes,	while	my	uncle,	tugging	at	a	dachshund,	stared	at	an	autumn	fly
traversing	the	white	and	immense	ceiling.	Outside	the	wind	blew	hard,	the	trees
in	front	of	the	house	rustled	with	a	few	remaining	fragile	leaves,	the	shutters
creaked,	inside	the	air	moved	slightly—and	I	was	overcome	by	a	premonition	of
a	totally	new	and	hypertrophied	manifestation	of	the	mug.	The	dogs	howled.
And	when	will	I	howl?	That	I	would	howl	was	a	given.	The	gentry's	strange	and
unreal	customs	of	being	pampered	and	mollycoddled	by	something,
hypertrophied	in	an	unimaginable	vacuum,	their	languor	and	softness,	fussiness,
politeness,	refinement,	pride,	tenderness,	nicety,	and	lurking	quirkiness	in	each
and	every	word—filled	me	with	mistrust	and	anxiety.	But	what	was	more
dangerous—a	solitary	late fall	fly	on	the	ceiling,	an	aunt	with	her	memories	of
childhood,	Kneadus	and	his	farmhand,	illnesses,	the	fringe	on	a	sofa,	or	the
whole	lot,	bunched	up	and	lumped	onto	the	tip	of	a	small	spike?	Anticipating	the
unavoidable	mug,	I	sat	quietly	on	my	ancestral	Biedermeier,	a	memento
inherited	from	my	forebears,	while	my	aunt	sat	on	hers	and,	to	keep	the
conversation	going,	began	groaning	about	drafts,	that	they're	a	terrible	thing	for
one's	bones	at	this	time	of	the	year.	Zosia,	an	ordinary	young	woman,	not	in	any
way	different	from	other	young	women	of	which	there	are	thousands	in	our
country	manors,	burst	out	laughing	in	an	attempt	to	keep	the	conversation	going
—and	everyone	burst	out	laughing	with	a	laughter	of	sociable,	polite
bewilderment—	and	they	stopped	laughing...	For	whom	did	they	laugh,
perchance,	for	whom?
But	uncle	Konstanty,	who	was	tall	and	lean,	effete,	balding,	with	a	long,	thin
nose,	gaunt	fingers,	thin	lips	and	delicate	nostrils,	highly	polished	manners,
experienced	in	life,	reclined	in	his	chair	with	extraordinary	ease	and	nonchalantelegance,	and	rested	his	feet,	clad	in	suede	shoes,	upon	the	table.
"Drafts,"	he	said,	"yes,	we	had	them.	But	they're	gone	now."
The	fly	buzzed.
"Kostie,"	auntie	exclaimed	tenderly,	"stop	fretting."	And	she	gave	him	a	piece	of
candy.
But	he	fretted	anyway	and	yawned—he	opened	his	mouth	wide,	till	I	saw	his
farthest	cigarette stained	yellowish	teeth,	and	he	blatantly	yawned	twice	more
with	the	utmost	nonchalance.
"Tereperepumpum,"	he	mumbled,	"a	dog	once	danced	in	a	backyard,	and	a	she 
cat	laughed	so	hard!"
He	pulled	out	a	silver	cigarette	case	and	tapped	it	with	his	fingers,	but	it	fell	to
the	floor.	He	didn't	pick	it	up,	he	yawned	again—at	whom	did	he	yawn?	For
whom	did	he	yawn?	His	family	accompanied	his	actions	in	silence,	sitting	on
their	Biedermeiers.	Francis,	the	old	servant,	entered.
"Dinner	is	served,"	he	announced;	he	wore	a	frock	coat.
"Dinner,"	auntie	said.
"Dinner,"	Zosia	said.
"Dinner,"	Zygmunt	said.
"My	cigarette	case,"	my	uncle	said.	The	servant	picked	it	up—we	moved	to	the
dining	room,	which	was	in	the	style	of	Henry	IV,	old	portraits	hung	on	the	walls,
in	a	corner	a	samovar	was	hissing.	They	served	baked	ham	in	a	crust,	and	canned
peas.	Conversation	sounded	again.	"Dig	in,"	Konstanty	said,	helping	himself	to	a
little	mustard	and	some	horseradish	(but	against	whom	did	he	do	this?),	"there's
nothing	better	than	ham	baked	in	a	crust,	if	properly	prepared.	Simon's	is	the
only	place	where	you	can	get	good	ham,	the	only	place,	tereperepumpum,	is
Simon's!	Let's	have	a	drink.	A	jigger."
"Let's	have	a	swig,"	Zygmunt	said,	and	my	uncle	asked:	"Do	you	remember	the
ham	they	served	before	the	war	on	Erywahska	Street?"	"Ham	is	hard	to	digest,"
auntie	answered.	"Zosia,	why	so	little,	no	appetite	again?"	Zosia	answered,	but
no	one	listened	because	she	obviously	did	it	just	to	say	something.	Konstanty	ate
rather	loudly,	though	with	style,	punctiliously;	working	his	fingers	over	his	plate
he	would	take	a	rasher,	add	some	mustard	or	horseradish,	maybe	salt	or	pepper,
butter	a	slice	of	toast,	and	shove	the	ham	into	his	gaping	mouth—once	he	even
spat	out	a	piece	of	it	because	he	didn't	like	it.	The	valet	immediately	removed	it.
Against	whom	did	he	spit	it	out?	Against	whom	did	he	butter	the	toast?	Auntie
ate	kind heartedly,	rather	copiously	but	a	thin	slice	at	a	time,	Zosia	was	shovingit	in,	Zygmunt	ate	listlessly,	while	the	servants	waited	on	us	t	i	p	t	o	e	i	n	g.
Suddenly	Kneadus	stopped	eating,	his	fork	halfway	to	his	mouth,	and	he	froze,
his	gaze	darkened,	his	mug	turned	ashen gray,	his	lips	parted,	and	a	most
beautiful	mandolin	smile	blossomed	on	his	horrible	mug.	A	smile	of	welcome,	of
greeting,	hail,	so	you're	here,	I'm	here	too—he	rested	his	hands	on	the	table	and
leaned	forward,	his	upper	lip	rose	as	if	to	sob;	but	he	didn't	sob,	he	just	leaned
farther.	He	had	spotted	a	farmhand!	A	farmhand	was	in	the	room!	The	valet!	The
valet	was	the	farmhand!	I	had	no	doubt—the	valet	serving	the	ham	and	peas	was
the	farmhand	of	his	dreams.
A	farmhand!	Kneadus'	age,	no	more	than	eighteen,	neither	short	nor	tall,	neither
ugly	nor	handsome—fair haired	but	not	blond.	He	bustled	and	waited	on	us
barefoot,	a	napkin	slung	over	his	left	arm,	no	collar,	his	shirt	buttoned	at	the	neck
with	a	stud,	a	farmhand's	usual	Sunday	best.	He	had	a	mug	all	right—but	his
mug	wasn't	anything	like	Kneadus'	awful	mug,	it	was	not	an	artificially	created
mug,	but	a	natural,	rough hewn,	ordinary	peasant	mug.	It	was	not	a	face	that	had
turned	into	a	mug,	but	a	mug	that	had	never	ever	had	the	honor	of	being	a	face—
his	mug	was	as	dumb	as	a	leg!	He	wasn't	worthy	of	having	a	respectable	face,
just	as	he	wasn't	worthy	of	being	called	blond	and	handsome—a	valet	unworthy
of	being	a	buder!	Without	gloves	and	barefoot,	he	changed	the	smart	set's	plates,
which	surprised	no	one—a	young	man	not	worthy	of	a	frock	coat.	A	farmhand!	.
.	.	What	bad	luck	had	brought	him	here,	to	my	aunt's	and	uncle's	house?	"Here
we	go,"	I	thought,	chewing	the	ham	that	now	tasted	like	rubber,	"it's	starting..."
But	to	keep	the	conversation	going	they	began	to	urge	us	to	eat,	I	had	to	try	some
of	the	pear	compote—and	again	there	was	a	round	of	small	pretzels	with	tea,	I
had	to	say	"thank	you,"	eat	candied	plums	that	stuck	in	my	throat,	and	auntie
kept	apologizing	for	such	a	modest	dinner.
"Tereperepumpum,"	said	uncle	Konstanty,	who	sprawled	at	the	table	and,
opening	his	mouth	wide,	lazily	tossed	in	a	plummie,	which	he	had	picked	up
with	two	fingers.	"Eat	up!	Eat	up!	To	your	hearts'	content,	my	dears!"	He
swallowed	it,	smacked	his	lips—and	said,	as	if	with	a	deliberate	display	of
satiety:
"Tomorrow	I'll	lay	off	six	grooms,	without	pay,	because	I	have	no	money!"
"Oh,	Kostie!"	auntie	exclaimed,	all	heart.	But	he	replied.
"Cheese e oh,	please."
Against	whom	did	he	say	that?	The	servants	waited	on	us	tiptoeing.	Kneadus
stared,	he	drank	with	his	eyes	that	uncon torted	peasant's	mug,	meadowy	anddumb,	he	imbibed	it	as	if	it	were	the	one	and	only	drink	in	the	whole	world.
TheValet	tripped	under	that	onerous	and	distracted	stare,	almost	spilling	tea	on
auntie's	head.	Old	Francis	lightly	boxed	his	ear.
"Oh,	Francis,"	auntie	said	kindly.
"He	better	watch	out!"	my	uncle	mumbled,	and	he	took	out	a	cigarette.	The	valet
sprang	to	him	with	a	light.	My	uncle	let	out	a	cloud	of	smoke	through	his	thin
lips,	cousin	Zygmunt	let	another	cloud	pass	between	his	equally	thin	lips,	and	we
moved	to	the	living	room,	where	everyone	sat	on	his	or	her	priceless
Biedermeier.	The	pricelessness	filled	us	with	terrible	luxury	from	below.	Foul
weather	howled	outside	the	windows;	cousin	Zygmunt,	mildly	animated,
suggested:
"A	little	game	of	bridge,	perhaps?"
But	Kneadus	didn't	know	how	to	play,	so	Zygmunt	fell	silent	and	just	sat	there.
Zosia	mentioned	something	about	the	weather,	that	it	often	rains	in	the	fall,
auntie	asked	me	about	auntie	Jadzia.	The	conversation	was	petering	out—my
uncle	crossed	his	legs,	raised	his	head,	and	looked	at	the	ceiling	where	a	listless
fly	wandered	to	and	fro—and	he	yawned,	showing	us	his	palate	and	a	row	of
cigarette stained,	yellowish	teeth.	Zygmunt	silently	busied	himself	with	slow
leg wagging	as	he	tracked	glints	of	light	across	the	tip	of	his	shoe,	auntie	and
Zosia	sat	with	their	hands	in	their	laps,	a	little	pinscher	sat	on	a	table	and
watched	Zygmunt's	leg,	while	Kneadus	sat	in	the	shadow,	his	head	resting	on	his
palm,	and	he	was	awfully	quiet.	Then	auntie	perked	up,	ordered	the	servants	to
prepare	the	guest	room,	to	place	hot water	bottles	in	our	beds,	and	to	bring	us	a
small	dish	of	nuts	and	fruit	preserves	as	a	nightcap.	My	uncle,	on	hearing	this,
said	casually	that	he	too	would	like	some,	whereupon	the	servants	swiftly
obliged.	We	ate,	though	we	were	already	full—we	couldn't	refuse,	it	was	all	on	a
tray,	ready	to	be	eaten,	and	also	because	they	kept	insisting	and	inviting	us	to	eat.
Kneadus	declined	over	and	over,	he	definitely	didn't	want	any	fruit	preserves,
and	I	had	an	idea	why—	because	of	the	farmhand—but,	out	of	the	kindness	of
her	heart	auntie	spooned	him	a	double	portion,	and	she	offered	me	candy	from	a
small	bag.	It's	all	so	sweet,	all	too	sweet,	sickly sweet,	but	with	a	dessert	plate	in
front	of	me,	I	can't	say	no,	I'm	nauseous,	my	childhood,	auntie,	short	pants,
family,	the	fly,	the	pinscher,	the	farmhand,	Kneadus,	my	full	stomach,	it's	stuffy
here,	the	weather	is	foul	outside	the	window,	glut	and	excess	of	everything,	it's
all	too	much,	dreadful	wealth,	the	Biedermeier	satiates	me	from	below.	But	I
can't	get	up	and	say	goodnight,	not	without	saying	something	first...	we	finally
try,	but	they	stop	us,	inviting	us	to	eat	more.	Against	whom	does	uncleKonstanty	stuff	one	more	strawberry	between	his	sugared	and	weary	lips?
Suddenly	Zosia	sneezes,	and	this	gives	us	an	out.	Goodbyes,	bows,	thanks,
bumping	into	body	parts.	The	chambermaid	leads	us	up	wooden,	winding	stairs
that	I	seem	to	remember...	Behind	us	walks	a	servant	with	nuts	and	fruit
preserves	on	a	tray.	It's	stifling	and	warm.	I	burp,	the	fruit	preserves	repeat	in	my
mouth.	Kneadus	also	burps.	The	country	manor...
When	the	door	closed	behind	the	chambermaid	he	asked:
"Did	you	see	that?"
He	sat	down	and	hid	his	face	in	his	hands.
"You're	talking	about	the	valet?"	I	replied,	feigning	indifference.	I	quickly	pulled
down	the	blind—the	lit	window	in	the	dark	expanses	of	the	wooded	grounds	was
scaring	me.
"I	have	to	talk	to	him.	I'll	go	down!	Or,	no—ring	for	him!	He's	surely	assigned	to
serve	us.	Ring	twice."
"What	for?"	I	tried	to	dissuade	him.	"There	can	be	complications.	Remember
that	these	are	my	aunt	and	uncle	.	.	.	Kneadus!"	I	exclaimed,	"don't	ring,	tell	me
first	what	you	want	with	him?"
He	pressed	the	bell.
"Damn	it!"	he	growled,	"as	if	the	fruit	preserves	weren't	enough,	they've	left	us
apples	and	pears.	Hide	them	in	the	closet.	Throw	away	the	hot water	bottles.	I
don't	want	him	to	see	it	all..."
He	was	furious	with	the	kind	of	fury	behind	which	lurks	the	fear	of	one's	fate,
the	fury	of	the	most	intimate	human	affairs.
"Joey,"	he	trembled	as	he	whispered	warmly,	sincerely,	"Joey,	did	you	see	that,
he's	got	a	real	mug—not	one	of	those	rigged up	ones,	this	is	an	ordinary	mug!	A
mug	without	any	face pulling!	A	classic	farmhand,	I	won't	find	a	better	one
anywhere.	Help	me!	I	can't	manage	it	all	by	myself!"
"Calm	down!	What	do	you	want	to	do?"
"I	don't	know,	I	don't	know.	If	I	become	friends	with	him	...	if	I	succeed	in	fra	.	.
.	fra	.	.	.	fraternizing	with	him	.	.	."	he	admitted,	embarrassed,	"to	frater...	nize!
Socia...	lize!	I	must	do	it!	Help	me!"
The	valet	entered	the	room.
"At	yer	service,"	he	said.
He	stood	in	the	door,	waiting	for	orders,	so	Kneadus	ordered	him	to	pour	some
water	into	a	washbowl.	The	valet	poured	the	water	and	again	stood	still—soKneadus	ordered	him	to	open	a	casement,	and	when	the	fellow	did	that	and
stood	still	Kneadus	ordered	him	to	hang	a	towel	on	a	peg;	when	he	did	that,
Kneadus	ordered	him	to	put	his	jacket	on	a	hanger—but	these	orders	tortured
Kneadus	terribly.	He	ordered,	the	farmhand	carried	everything	out	without	a
murmur—these	orders,	however,	became	more	and	more	like	a	bad	dream,	oh,	to
order	one's	farmhand	about	instead	of	fraternizing	with	him—to	order	him	about
with	lordly	capriciousness,	to	go	through	a	whole	night	of	lordly	fantasies	in	an
ordering	frenzy!	Finally,	not	knowing	what	else	to	command,	having	run	out	of
things	to	command,	he	ordered	him	to	bring	out	the	hot water	bottles	and	apples
hidden	in	the	closet,	and	he	whispered	to	me,	totally	broken:
"You	try.	I	can't."
I	slowly	took	off	my	jacket,	and	I	sat	on	the	edge	of	my	bed,	dangling	my	legs—
a	position	more	conducive	to	gabbing	with	a	farmhand.	I	asked	him	slowly,	out
of	boredom:
"What's	your	name?"
"Valek,"	he	replied,	and	it	was	obvious	that	this	wasn't	just	an	informal	name,	it
agreed	with	him—as	if	he	were	unworthy	of	the	formal	'Valenty'	or	of	a	last
name.	Kneadus	shuddered.
"How	long	have	you	been	in	service	here?"
"About	a	month,	sire."
"And	where	were	you	employed	before	that?"
"In	the	stables,	sire."
"Do	you	like	it	here?"
"Yes,	sire."
"Bring	us	some	warm	water."
"Very	good,	sire."
When	he	left,	Kneadus	had	tears	in	his	eyes.	He	cried	his	heart	out.	Tears
trickled	down	his	haggard	face.	"Did	you	hear	that?	Did	you	hear	that?	Valek!
He	doesn't	even	have	a	last	name!	Oh,	it	all	fits	perfectly!	Did	you	see	his	mug?
A	mug	without	any	artifice,	just	an	ordinary	mug!	Joey,	if	he	won't	fra	.	.	.
fraternize	with	me,	I	don't	know	what	I'll	do!"	He	was	working	himself	into	a
rage,	he	reproached	me	for	having	ordered	the	valet	to	fetch	hot	water,	and	he
could	not	forgive	himself	for	having	ordered	Valek,	while	at	a	loss	for	other
commands,	to	bring	out	the	hot water	bottles	we	had	hidden	in	the	closet.	"He
probably	never	uses	hot	water,	let	alone	water	in	bottles	for	his	bed.	He	probably
never	washes	himself.	And	yet	he's	not	dirty.	Joey,	did	you	notice	he	doesn'twash,	and	yet	he's	not	dirty—his	dirt	seems	harmless,	it's	not	disgusting!	Hey 
ho,	look	at	our	filth,	our	filth..."
In	this	guest	room	of	an	old	country	manor	his	passion	was	erupting	with	a
mighty	force.	He	wiped	away	his	tears—the	valet	returned	with	the	water.	This
time	Kneadus	followed	my	line	of	questioning;
"How	old	are	you?"	he	asked	looking	straight	ahead.
"Eeeh...	how	should	I	know,	sire."
Kneadus	was	flabbergasted.	The	valet	didn't	know!	He	didn't	know	how	old	he
was!	A	heavenly	farmhand	indeed,	free	of	ridiculous	appendages!	Under	the
pretext	of	wanting	to	wash	his	hands	he	went	closer	to	the	farmhand	and,
controlling	his	trembling,	he	said:
"You're	probably	
my	
age."
But	this	was	not	a	question.	It	left	the	valet	some	leeway	to	respond.	Fra	...
ternization	was	supposed	to	begin.	The	valet	replied:
"Very	good,	sir."
Whereupon	Kneadus	returned	to	the	unavoidable	questioning:
"Do	you	know	how	to	read	and	write?"
"Ee	...	why	no!	sire."
"You	have	a	family?"
"I	have	a	sister,	sire."
"And	what	does	your	sister	do?"
"She	milks	the	cows,	sire."
He	stood	there,	while	Kneadus	focused	on	him—it	seemed	there	was	no	other
way	except	through	questioning	and	giving	orders,	commands	or	questions.	So
he	sat	down	again	and	commanded:
"Take	off	my	shoes."
I	sat	down	too.	The	room	was	long	and	narrow,	not	easy	for	the	three	of	us	to
move	about.	The	huge,	grim	house	stood	in	the	wet	and	murky	wooded	grounds.
The	wind	seemed	to	have	let	up,	but	this	was	worse—a	sharp	wind	would	have
felt	better.	Kneadus	stuck	out	his	leg,	the	farmhand	knelt,	and,	his	mug	lowered,
he	bent	over	the	leg	while	Kneadus'	mug	hovered	feudally	above	him,	pale	and
horrible,	hardened	in	commands,	no	longer	knowing	what	to	ask.	I	asked	out	of
the	blue:
"Does	the	squire	ever	slap	you	in	the	mug?"
The	valet	suddenly	brightened	and	called	out	cheerfully,	like	a	true	peasant:"Oh,	yes	sir,	in	the	mug!	Jee,	yeah,	in	the	mug!"
As	soon	as	he	said	that,	I	sprang	up,	I	swung	my	arm	and	smacked	him	in	the	left
cheek	as	hard	as	I	could.	In	the	quiet	of	the	night	the	sound	was	like	a	pistol	shot.
The	fellow	clutched	his	mug	but	instantly	dropped	his	hand	and	stood	up.
"Wow,	that	was	a	good	slap,	sire!"	he	whispered	all	agog	with	admiration.
"Get	out!"	I	shouted.
He	went	out.
"What	on	earth	did	you	do	that	for?!"	Kneadus	said,	wringing	his	hands.	"I
wanted	to	shake	hands	with	him!	Go	hand	in	hand	with	him!	Then	our	mugs,	and
everything	else,	would	have	been	equal.	Yet	see	what	you've	done	with	your
hand,	you	hit	him	in	the	mug!	And	I	stuck	my	leg	into	his	hands!	To	unlace	my
shoe,"	he	moaned,	"my	shoe!	Why	did	you	slap	him?!"
I	had	no	idea	why.	It	happened	as	if	a	spring	had	been	released,	I	shouted	"get
out"	because	I	had	hit	him,	but	why	did	I	hit	him?	There	was	a	knock	at	the	door
—and	cousin	Zygmunt,	candle	in	hand,	in	slippers	and	trousers,	appeared	on	the
threshold.
"Did	someone	fire	a	shot?"	he	asked.	"I	thought	I	heard	a	shot	from	a
Browning?"
"I	shot	your	Valek	in	the	snoot."
"You	shot	him	in	the	snoot?"
"He	filched	my	cigarette."
I	preferred	him	to	hear	it	from	me,	in	my	version,	than	tomorrow	morning	from
the	servants.	Zygmunt	was	slightly	surprised,	but,	like	a	good	host,	he	laughed
and	said:
"Great.	That'll	teach	him!	But—you	hit	him	in	the	mug,	just	like	that?"	he	asked
in	disbelief.	I	laughed,	while	Kneadus	cast	me	a	look	which	I'll	never	forget,	a
look	of	one	betrayed,	and	he	went	to	the	bathroom,	or	so	I	thought.	My	cousin's
gaze	followed	him.	"Your	friend	seems	to	disapprove—eh?"	he	observed	with
slight	irony,	"he's	indignant?	Typical	bourgeois!"	"Bourgeois!"	I	said,	what	else
could	I	say?	"Bourgeois,"	he	said,	"a	guy	like	Valek	will	respect	you	like	his	lord
and	master	if	you	hit	him	in	the	snoot.	You	have	to	know	the	likes	of	them!	They
love	it!"
"They	love	it!"	I	said.	"They	love	it,	love	it,	ha,	ha,	ha!	They	love	it!"	I	couldn't
believe	that	this	was	my	cousin	who,	until	now,	had	treated	me	with	reserve,	now
his	apathy	was	gone,	his	eyes	were	shining,	he	liked	my	slapping	Valek's	mug,
and	he	now	liked	me;	a	pure	bred	young	master	surfaced	from	within	an	indolentand	bored	student,	as	if	he	had	just	breathed	through	his	nostrils	the	aroma	of
forests	and	of	common	folk.	He	placed	the	candle	on	the	windowsill	and	sat	at
the	foot	of	the	bed	with	a	cigarette.	"They	love	it,"	he	said,	"they	love	it!	You
may	slap	them,	but	you	must	tip	them	too—I	don't	go	for	slapping	without
tipping.	In	times	past,	my	father	and	uncle	Severyn	used	to	hit	the	doorman	at
the	Grand	Hotel	in	the	snoot."	"And	our	uncle	Eustachy,"	I	said,	"once	hit	his
barber	in	the	snoot."	"No	one	hit	the	snoot	as	well	as	grandma	Evelina,	but	that
belongs	to	the	past.	Well,	Toby	Patz	got	drunk	and	smacked	a	train	conductor	in
the	snoot.	Do	you	know	Pavel	Patz,	he's	very	unaffected."	I	replied	that	I	knew	a
few	of	the	Patz	men,	all	extremely	natural	and	unpretentious,	but	thus	far	I	hadn't
met	Toby.	I	said	I	knew	that	Harry	Pitwicki	once	broke	a	window	at	the	Club
Cockatoo	with	a	waiter's	snoot.	"I	only	bashed	a	ticket	collector	in	the	snoot	on
one	occasion,"	Ziggie	said.	"Do	you	know	the	Pipowskis?	The	Mrs.	is	a	fanatical
snob,	but	she	has	extremely	good	taste.	We	may	go	partridge	hunting	tomorrow."
(Where	was	Kneadus?	Where	did	he	go?	Why	isn't	he	back?)	In	the	meantime
my	cousin	showed	no	inclination	to	leave,	the	slap	in	Valek's	face	brought	us
closer,	like	a	shot	of	vodka,	and,	while	smoking	his	cigarette	he	chatted	about
face bashing,	about	partridges,	about	Mrs.	Pipowska,	about	unpretentiousness,
about	Tacyanki	and	Colombina,	about	Toby	and	Harry,	how	one	had	to	be	savvy
about	life,	realistic,	he	talked	about	the	agricultural	school,	and	about	the	dough
I'll	earn	when	I'm	done	studying.	I	responded	in	a	similar	vein.	So	he's	back	with
the	same	stuff	again.	So	I'm	back	with	the	same.	So	he's	back	with	snoot 
bashing,	that	one	has	to	know	when,	with	whom,	and	for	how	much,	so	I'm	back
with	it's	better	to	box	an	ear	than	to	punch	someone	in	the	jaw.	But	in	all	of	this
there	was	something	unreal,	and	I	tried	a	few	times	to	interject	into	our	talk	that
all	this	doesn't	happen	anymore,	it's	no	longer	acceptable,	nowadays	no	one
bashes	anyone,	that's	gone,	perhaps	it	never	was,	it's	a	legend,	a	squire's
imagination.	Yet	I	couldn't,	oh,	how	sweet	this	chatting,	the	squirely	imagination
has	grabbed	us	and	won't	let	us	go,	we	hold	forth	like	one	young	master	to
another!	"Sometimes	it's	a	good	thing—mug	slapping!"	"In	the	snoot—it's	good
for	you!	Nothing	like	hitting	a	guy	in	the	snoot!	Well,	it's	time	for	me	to	go,"	he
finally	said,	"I've	stayed	too	long	already...	We'll	see	each	other	from	time	to
time	in	Warsaw.	I'll	introduce	you	to	Toby	Patz.	Look—it's	almost	midnight.
Your	friend's	been	in	the	bathroom	a	long	time...	maybe	he's	sick.	Goodnight."
He	hugged	me.
"Goodnight,	Joey."
"Goodnight,	Ziggie,"	I	replied.Why	wasn't	Kneadus	back?	I	wiped	sweat	off	my	brow.	Why	this	conversation
with	my	cousin?	I	looked	out	the	casement,	it	had	stopped	raining,	I	could	see	no
farther	than	fifty	paces,	here	and	there	in	the	thick	of	night	I	guessed	at	the
shapes	of	trees—but	their	shapes	seemed	darker	than	darkness	itself	and	even
less	defined.	Behind	this	veil	the	wooded	grounds,	secret	and	who	knows	what
else	besides,	woven	through	and	through	by	tracts	of	desolate	fields,	dripped
with	moisture.	Unable	to	make	out	what	was	before	my	eyes,	looking,	yet	unable
to	see	anything	except	shapes,	darker	than	the	night,	I	closed	the	window	and
retreated	into	the	back	of	the	room.	There	had	been	no	need	for	it	all.	No	need	to
hit	the	farmhand.	No	need	for	the	chat.	Here	the	snoot hitting	was	like	a	shot	of
vodka,	quite	different	from	the	democratic,	dry	face slapping	in	the	city.	What
the	hell	is	a	servant's	snoot	in	an	old	country	manor?	It	was	terrible	that,	by
slapping	him	in	the	face,	I	had	brought	the	valet's	mug	to	the	surface	and,	to	top
it	all	off,	I	had	lied	about	him	to	the	young	master.	Where	was	Kneadus?
He	returned	at	about	one	in	the	morning;	he	didn't	come	in	right	away	but
peeked	through	the	half open	door	to	see	if	I	was	asleep he	slipped	in	as	if
returning	from	some	nocturnal	carousal	and	quickly	turned	down	the	lamp	wick.
He	undressed	hurriedly.	When	he	leaned	over	the	lamp	I	noticed	that	his	mug
had	undergone	a	sordid	transformation—it	was	puffed	up,	swollen	on	the	left
side,	and	it	looked	like	a	little	apple,	a	little	stewed	apple,	and	everything	about
him	came	out	like	mush.	What	a	hellish	belittlement!	It	again	appeared	in	my
life,	this	time	on	my	friend's	face!	He's	turned	into	a	horrible	coxcomb—that's
what	popped	into	my	head—a	horrible	coxcomb.	What	gigantic	force	had	fixed
him	like	this?	He	answered	my	question	in	a	voice	that	was	a	bit	too	thin	and
squeaky:
"I	was	in	the	pantry.	I	frater...	ternized	with	the	farmhand.	He	hit	me	in	the	mug."
"The	valet	hit	you	in	the	mug?"	I	couldn't	believe	my	ears.
"He	did,"	he	joyfully	assured	me,	but	with	a	joy	that	was	artificial	and	still	too
feeble.	"We're	brothers.	I	was	finally	able	to	communicate	with	him."	But	he	said
this	like	a	
Sonntagsjager,	
like	a	city	official	bragging	about	drinking	at	a	country
wedding.	He'd	been	manhandled	with	a	crushing,	devastating	force—but	his
attitude	toward	that	force	was	insincere.	I	pressed	him	with	questions,	and	he
grudgingly	revealed,	hiding	his	face	in	the	shadow:
"I	ordered	him."
"What?!"	my	blood	boiled,	"what	do	you	mean?	You	ordered	him	to	hit	you	in
the	face?!	He'll	think	you're	crazy!	Congratulations!	Wait	till	my	aunt	and	unclehear	about	this!"
"It's	your	fault,"	he	said	grimly	and	tersely,	"you	shouldn't	have	hit	him.	You
started	it.	You	fancied	yourself	a	lordship!	I	had	to	take	it	from	him,	because	you
gave	it	to	him	...	Without	it	there	would	be	no	equality,	and	I	wouldn't	be	able	to
fra...	ter..."
He	turned	off	the	light	and	spewed	out	in	broken	sentences	the	whole	story	of	his
desperate	endeavors.	He	found	the	farmhand	in	the	pantry	cleaning	his	masters'
shoes,	and	he	sat	next	to	him,	whereupon	the	valet	stood	up.	
Da	capo,	
again—he
tried	to	make	conversation,	to	put	the	fellow	at	ease,	make	him	open	up	and	be
friends,	but	his	words,	even	as	they	left	his	lips,	deteriorated	into	a	sickening	and
senseless	pastorale.	The	farmhand	did	his	best	to	answer	him,	but	it	was	obvious
that	it	was	beginning	to	bore	Valek,	and	he	didn't	understand	what	this	crazy
lordship	wanted	from	him.	Kneadus	finally	became	entangled	in	cheap	verbosity
derived	from	the	French	Revolution	and	from	the	Bill	of	Rights,	he	went	on	to
explain	that	all	men	are	equal	and,	under	this	pretext,	demanded	that	the	valet
shake	hands	with	him—but	the	latter	flatly	refused.	"My	hand's	not	fit	fer	your
lo'dship."	Kneadus	then	had	the	preposterous	idea	that	if	he	succeeded	in	forcing
the	farmhand	to	slap	him	in	the	mug,	the	ice	would	be	broken.	"Hit	me	in	the
snoot,"	he	implored,	unmindful	of	anything,	"in	the	snoot!"	and	bending	over,	he
bared	his	face	to	the	valet's	hand.	The	valet,	however,	went	on	refusing:	"Ee,"	he
said,	"why	should	I	hit	your	lo'dship?"	Kneadus	begged	and	begged,	until	finally
he	yelled:	"Slap	me,	damn	it,	do	as	I	tell	you!	What	the	devil	is	the	matter	with
you?!"	At	that	instant	he	saw	stars,	smash,	bang—the	farmhand	had	whacked
him	in	the	mug!	"Once	more,"	Kneadus	yelled,	"once	more,	damn	it!"	Crash,
bang,	stars	again.	He	opened	his	eyes	and	saw	the	valet	standing	in	front	of	him
with	his	hands,	ready	to	carry	out	his	orders!	But	a	slap	in	the	face	that	is	given
in	answer	to	a	command	is	not	a	true	slap	in	the	face—no	more	than	pouring
water	into	the	washbowl	or	taking	off	his	shoes—and	a	blush	of	embarrassment
covered	the	blush	from	the	slapping.	"More,	more,"	the	martyr	whispered,	so
that	the	farmhand	would	at	last	fra	.	.	.	ternize	with	him	by	way	of	his	face.	And
again—crash,	bang,	stars—oh,	this	mug pounding	in	an	empty	pantry,	among
wet	dishrags,	over	a	tub	of	hot	water!
Fortunately,	this	son	of	the	peasantry	found	his	lordship's	whims	amusing.	He
probably	reached	the	conclusion	that	his	lordship	had	gone	soft	in	the	head	(and
nothing	emboldens	the	rabble	like	their	lordships'	mental	illness),	and	he
proceeded	to	make	fun,	peasant	style,	which	created	a	kinship	of	sorts.	Soon
enough	the	farmhand	was	fraternizing	to	such	a	degree	that	he	was	pokingKneadus	in	the	ribs	and	finagling	small	change	from	him.
"Gimme,	mister,	for	some	smokes!"
But	this	wasn't	it	at	all,	it	was	hostile,	unbrotherly,	and	unfriendly,	full	of	peasant
style	mockery,	lethal,	far	from	the	desired	fraternization.	Yet	Kneadus	put	up
with	it,	he	preferred	the	valet	to	abuse	him,	rather	than	to	abuse	the	valet	as	if	he
were	his	lord	and	master.	A	kitchen	maid,	Marcy,	came	out	of	the	kitchen	with	a
wet	rag	to	wash	the	floor	and	began	to	marvel	at	the	shenanigans:
"Jesus	A'mighty!	This	really	is	somethin'!"
The	house	was	asleep—and	so	they	could,	with	impunity,	indulge	in	frolicking
with	his	lordship	who	was	paying	them	a	visit	in	the	pantry,	to	laugh	at	him	with
their	peasant,	rustic	superlaugh.	Kneadus	himself	helped	them	along	and	laughed
with	them.	But	gradually,	while	ridiculing	Kneadus,	they	began	also	to	laugh	at
their	own	master	and	mistress.	"That's	them	ohright!	They	do	notin',	they're	fer
ever	doin'	notin'	but	stuffin'	and	stuffin'	'emselves	till	they	bust!	They	stuff
'emselves,	get	sick,	lie	around,	walk	about	their	rooms,	talkin'	about	somethin'.
An'	how	they	gobble!	O	Mother	o'	Jesus!	I	wouldn't	eat	half	that	much,	even
though	'am	just	a	simple	bastard.	There's	dinner,	and	afternoon	tea,	candy,	and
fruit	preserves,	eggs	'n	onions	for	brunch.	Their	lo'dships	eat	like	pigs	and	gorge
'emselves	with	sweets,	then—bellies	up	they	lie	about	and	get	sick	from	it	all.
An'	during	a	hunt	the	squire	clambered	up	the	gamekeeper!	Up	the	gamekeeper
he	clambered!	Vincenty,	the	gamekeeper,	was	standin'	behind	him	with	a	spare
shotgun,	the	squire	shot	at	a	boar,	the	boar	bounded	toward	him,	so	the	squire
dropped	the	shotgun	and	clambered	up	Vincenty—	Marcy,	be	quiet up	Vincenty
he	clambered!	'Cause	there	was	no	tree	close	by,	he	clambered	up	Vincenty!
Later	the	squire	gave	him	a	zloty	an'	told	him	not	to	breathe	a	word	of	it,	or	it'll
cost	him	his	job."	"O	Jesus!	Oh,	for	chrissakes	stop	it,	me	belly	aches	from
laughin'!"	Marcy	grabbed	her	belly.	"An'	the	young	lady	promenades,	lookin'
around—goes	for	walks.	The	Mr.	and	Mrs.	promenade,	lookin'	around.	His
lo'dship	Zygmunt	keeps	lookin'	at	me,	only	I'm	kind	'a	below	him—he	pinched
me	once,	but	nothin'	doin'!	He	kept	lookin',	an'	lookin'	around	so	nobody's
watchin'	us	till	I	got	a	belly	ache	from	laughin',	an'	I	run	away!	So	later	he	gave
me	a	zloty,	told	me	not	to	tell	nobody,	but	nobody,	he	said	he	was	drunk!"
"Drunk,	me	foot!"	the	farmhand	butted	in.	"Other	girls	won't	have	nothin'	to	do
with	him	either,	'cause	he's	for	ever	lookin'	round.	So	he's	got	that	hag	in	the
village,	Josie,	the	widah,	an'	he	keeps	meetin'	up	with	her	in	the	bushes	by	the
pond,	but	he	made	her	swear	she'd	never	blab	on	him	to	nobody,	but	nobody—
oh,	yeah,	I	bet!"	"Hee,	hee,	hee,	hee!	Shush,	Valek,	darlin'!	Their	lo'dships	arevery	proper like!	Very	delicate like!"	"Oh,	yeah,	delicate,	you	have	to	wipe	their
noses,	they	can't	do	nothin'	fer	the'selves.	'Gimme	this,	hand	me	that,	fetch	me
t'other,'	you	have	to	hold	their	coats	for	'em,	they	won't	put	'em	on	the'selves.
When	ah	first	came	here—ah	felt	kinda	strange.	If	anybody	got	to	groomin'	and
accommodatin'	me	like	that,	ah'd	rather	sink	into	the	ground—honest.	I	have	to
put	lotions	on	the	squire	of	evenin's."	"A'n	I	have	to	knead	the	young	lady,"
squeaked	the	girl,	"knead	the	young	lady	wit'	my	hands,	'cause	she's	flabby like.
The	Mr.	and	Mrs.	are	so	soft,	and	their	little	hands!	Hee,	hee,	hee,	what	soft	little
hands	they	have!"	"O	Jesus!	They	promenade,	they	gorge	the'selves,	they	parley
Francey,	and	git	bored."	"Shush,	Valek,	darlin'!	That's	loose	talk,	the	squire's
lady's	kind!"	"Oh,	yeah,	kind,	she	puts	the	squeeze	on	us	folk—so	she's	got	to	be
kind!	The	stomachs	in	the	village	are	growlin'
wit'	hunger.	Them	put	the	squeeze	on	us.	Yes,	siree,	everybody	works	for	'em,
the	squire	goes	into	the	fields	just	to	watch	'em	slavin'	away."
"An'	the	squire's	lady's	afraid	of	the	cows.	She's	afraid	of	the	cows!!!	Their
lo'dships	are	conversin'!	Their	lo'dships	walk	about	and	converse—hee,	hee,	hee
—their	lo'dships'	skin	is	so	white like!	.	.."	The	wench	went	on	clamoring	and
marveling,	the	farmhand	prattled	in	wonderment,	gloating,	when	suddenly
Francis	walked	in	...
"Francis	walked	in?"	I	interrupted	Kneadus.	"The	butler?"
"Yes,	Francis!	The	devil	himself	brought	him,"	Kneadus	squeaked.	"Marcy's
clamor	must	have	wakened	him.	He	didn't	dare	say	anything	to	me,	of	course,
but	he	scolded	Marcy	and	the	farmhand—	that	this	was	no	time	for	jabbering,
scram,	to	work,	he	told	them	that	the	hour	was	late	and	the	dishes	weren't	done.
They	took	off.	What	a	mean	lackey!"
"Did	he	hear	anything?"
"I	don't	know—maybe	he	did.	He's	so	commonplace—a	flunky	with	sideburns
and	a	stiff	collar.	A	peasant	with	sideburns—a	traitor.	A	traitor	and	an	informer.
If	he	heard	anything—he's	sure	to	tell	on	us.	And	we	had	such	a	good	time
gabbing."
"There	will	be	hell	to	pay	..."	I	said	softly.
But	he	whined,	raising	his	voice	to	a	treble.
"Traitors!	And	you	too—you're	a	traitor!	You're	all	traitors,	traitors..."
I	couldn't	fall	asleep	for	a	long	time.	Above	the	ceiling,	in	the	attic,	martens	or
rats	scurried	around	making	a	racket,	I	heard	their	squeaks,	sudden	jumps,
running	and	chasing,	awful	screeches	of	animals	tense	with	wildness.	The	roofdripped	with	water.	Dogs	howled	like	so	many	automatons,	and	our	room	with
its	shades	drawn	tightly	was	a	box	of	darkness.	Kneadus	lay	on	the	other	bed
awake,	I	lay	supine	on	mine,	also	awake,	my	hands	under	my	head,	my	gaze
fixed	on	the	ceiling—we	were	both	watchful	as	our	inaudible	breathing
indicated.	What	was	he	doing	under	the	cover	of	darkness—yes	what,	since	he
wasn't	asleep	he	must	have	been	doing	something—and	I	was	doing	something
too.	Someone	who	is	not	asleep	is	active,	cannot	be	inactive.	Hence	he	must
have	been	active.	I	too	was	active.	What	was	he	thinking	about?	What	was	he
longing	for	in	his	squeaky,	high pitched	state,	tense	and	taut	as	if	seized	by
claws.	I	was	asking	God	to	let	him	sleep,	so	that	he	wouldn't	be	so	silent,	but
more	open,	less	secretive—he'd	relax,	loosen	up	...
A	night	of	torture!	I	didn't	know	what	to	do!	Run	away	at	the	crack	of	dawn?	I
was	sure	that	Francis,	the	old	servant,	would	tell	my	aunt	and	uncle	about	the
mug slapping	and	Kneadus'	palaver	with	the	farmhand.	And	then	the	infernal
dance	would	begin,	and	discord,	deceit,	devil	on	the	loose,	and	the	mug,	the	mug
would	come	into	its	own	again!	And	the	pupa!	Is	this	why	I	escaped	from	the
Youngbloods?	We	had	awakened	the	beast!	We	had	released	the	servants'
impudence!	That	terrible	night,	as	I	lay	sleepless	on	my	bed,	I	finally	grasped	the
mystery	of	a	country	manor,	of	squires	and	landed	gentry	in	general,	the	mystery
whose	manifold	and	murky	symptoms	had,	from	the	very	first	moment,	filled	me
with	foreboding	of	the	mug	and	its	terrifying	business!	It	was	their	servants	who
were	the	mystery.	Ragtag	peasantry	was	the	gentry's	mystery.	Against	whom	did
my	uncle	yawn,	or	shove	one	more	sweet	strawberry	into	his	mouth?	Against	the
ragtag	peasantry,	against	his	own	servants!	Why	didn't	he	pick	up	his	cigarette
case?	So	that	the	servants	would	pick	it	up	for	him.	Why	did	he	extend	civilities
to	us	with	a	schoolboy's	zeal,	so	much	politeness	and	consideration,	so	much
style	and	
bon	ton?	
In	order	to	draw	the	line	between	himself	and	the	servants
and,	by	opposing	the	servants,	to	preserve	patrician	custom.	And	everything,	no
matter	what	the	gentry	did,	was	done	with	regard	to	and	in	the	face	of	servants,
in	relation	to	house	servants	and	to	farmhands.
Could	it	have	been	otherwise?	Those	of	us	living	in	the	city	didn't	even	feel	like
lords	of	the	manor,	we	dressed,	spoke	and	gestured	the	same	way	as	the
proletariat,	and	a	myriad	of	imperceptible	semitones	united	us	with	the
proletariat—going	down	the	rungs	of	society	to	the	shopkeeper,	the	street	car
conductor,	the	cabdriver,	one	could	inconspicuously	go	down	all	they	way	to	the
garbage	collector;	but	here	in	the	country,	lordliness	towered	like	a	lonely	poplar
in	all	its	nakedness.	Here	at	the	manor	there	was	no	intermediary	between	thesquire	and	his	servant,	the	estate	manager	lived	in	the	farm	outbuildings,	the
priest	lived	at	the	refectory.	My	uncle's	proud,	ancestral	lordliness	sprouted
directly	out	of	the	rabble	undergrowth,	it	was	from	the	rabble	that	it	drew	its
vital	juices.	In	the	city,	services	were	provided	in	a	roundabout	way,	in	a
discretionary	manner—	each	to	each,	a	little	at	a	time—while	here	the	squire	had
an	actual,	personal	yokel,	who,	when	the	squire	raised	his	leg,	would	clean	his
shoe	.	.	.	And	my	uncle	and	auntie	certainly	didn't	know	what	was	said	about
them	in	the	pantry—how	they	looked	in	the	yokels'	eyes.	They	knew—but	they
wouldn't	let	this	knowledge	loose,	they	stifled	it,	strangled	it,	pushed	it	into	the
cellars	of	their	brain.
Oh,	to	be	seen	through	the	eyes	of	your	yokel!	To	be	watched	and	tattled	about
by	a	yokel!	To	be	constantly	refracted	by	the	boorish	prism	of	a	servant	who	has
access	to	your	rooms,	who	hears	your	conversations,	who	watches	your
behavior,	who	is	allowed	to	serve	coffee	at	your	table	or	at	your	bedside—to	be
the	subject	of	coarse,	fallow,	insipid	kitchen	prattle,	and	never	be	able	to	explain
yourself	on	an	equal	footing.	Truly,	it	is	only	through	servants	like	the	butler,
coachman,	chambermaid,	that	one	can	discover	the	core	of	country	gentry.
Without	the	butler	you	will	not	know	the	squire.	Without	the	chambermaid	you
will	not	fathom	the	mettle	of	the	squire's	lady	nor	the	pitch	of	her	lofty
aspirations,	and	you	will	know	the	squire's	son	through	the	country	wench.	Oh,	I
finally	understood	the	cause	of	their	strange	anxiety	and	constraint,	which	struck
everyone	coming	from	the	city	to	visit	a	country	manor.	It	was	the	rabble	that
scared	the	gentry.	It	was	the	rabble	that	constrained	them.	The	rabble	had	them
in	their	pocket.	Here	was—the	real	cause.	Here	was—their	perpetual,	secret
festering.	Here	was—their	subterranean,	life	and	death	pain,	seasoned	with	all
the	possible	venoms	of	their	struggles,	concealed	and	subterranean.	A
hundredfold	worse	than	mere	financial	disputes,	because	it	was	a	struggle
dictated	by	otherness	and	estrangement—otherness	of	body	and	estrangement	of
spirit.	Their	souls,	in	the	midst	of	peasant	souls,	were	in	the	woods;	their	lordly
and	delicate	bodies,	in	the	midst	of	yokels'	bodies,	were	in	the	jungle.	Their
hands	were	repulsed	by	the	yokel	paws,	their	legs	hated	yokel	legs,	their	faces
hated	the	mugs,	their	eyes—the	yokels'	eyeballs,	their	little	fingers—the	rabble's
stubby	fingers,	the	situation	smacked	all	the	more	of	humiliation	because	they
were	constantly	touched	and	groomed	by	them,	as	the	farmhand	had	said,
pampered	and	rubbed	down	with	creams	...	To	have	in	one's	own	home	and	near
you	nothing	but	dissimilar,	foreign	body	parts!—because	indeed,	within	the
radius	of	many	kilometers	there	were	only	peasant	limbs,	peasant	speech	"'course,	darlin',"	"I	ain't,"	"you	was,"	"chrissake,"	"mommy luv,"	"daddy luv,"
and	only	the	parish	priest	and	the	manager	in	the	farm	buildings	were	the	squires'
kinsmen.	But	the	manager	merely	had	a	position,	and	the	priest	actually	wore	a
skirt.	Wasn't	it	loneliness	then,	that	gave	rise	to	the	rapacious	hospitality	with
which	they	clung	to	us	after	supper—with	us	they	felt	more	at	ease.	We	were
their	allies.	Yet	Kneadus	betrayed	their	lordly	faces	with	the	farmhand's	peasant
mug.
The	perverse	fact	that	the	valet	had	hit	Kneadus'	face—the	face,	no	less,	of	his
lordship's	guest	and	a	young	sir	himself—must	bear	equally	perverse
consequences.	The	time honored	hierarchy	was	based	on	the	supremacy	of
lordly	parts,	and	it	was	a	system	of	intense	and	feudal	hierarchy,	in	which	his
lordship's	hand	was	level	with	the	servant's	mug,	and	his	leg	was	at	the	peasant's
midriff.	This	was	archaic	hierarchy.	An	ancient	system,	canon	and	law.	It	was	the
mystical	clasp	holding	his	lordship's	and	the	yokel's	body	parts	together,
sanctified	by	centuries	of	custom,	and	it	was	solely	in	this	configuration	that
their	lordships	could	touch	and	make	contact	with	the	yokels.	Hence	the	magic
of	mug slapping.	Hence	Valek's	almost	religious	worship	of	mug slapping.
Hence	Zygmunt's	lordly	revelry.	Nowadays,	of	course,	they	slapped	no	more
(although	Valek	did	admit	sometimes	getting	it	from	my	uncle),	yet	the	potential
for	a	slap	in	the	face	was	always	there,	and	that's	what	sustained	them	in	their
lordliness.	And	now,	didn't	the	yokel's	paw	unceremoniously	mate	with	his
lordship's	face?
And	now	the	servants	were	proudly	raising	their	heads.	On	went	the	kitchen
tittle tattle.	On	went	the	peasantry,	emboldened	and	corrupted	by	familiarity	with
the	body	parts,	openly	denigrating	their	lordships,	the	yokels'	criticism	was	on
the	rise—what	will	happen,	what	will	transpire	when	this	penetrates	to	my	aunt
and	uncle,	and	his	lordship's	face	stands	face	to	face	with	the	peasant's	lumpish
mug?14	Mug	on	the	Loose	and	New	Entrapment
And	indeed,	next	morning	after	breakfast	my	aunt	took	me	aside.	It	was	a	brisk,
sunny	morning,	the	earth	was	damp	and	black,	copses	of	trees	trailing	their
cerulean	autumn	foliage	stood	in	the	huge	courtyard;	under	the	trees	peaceable
hens	scratched	and	pecked	at	the	ground.	Time	stood	still	at	that	morning	hour,
and	golden	streaks	of	sunlight	lay	on	the	floor	of	the	smoking	room.	Docile	dogs
wandered	about	here	and	there.	Equally	docile	pigeons	cooed.	My	aunt,
however,	was	inwardly	billowing	like	a	heavy	sea.
"My	dear	child,"	she	said,	"please	explain	.	.	.	Francis	told	me	that	your	friend	is
apparently	hobnobbing	with	the	servants	in	the	kitchen.	Is	he	some	kind	of	an
agitator?"
"He's	a	theoretician,"	Zygmunt	said.	"Don't	worry,	Mother—he's	a	theorist	of
life!	He	arrived	here	to	the	countryside	with	his	theories—	a	democrat	from	the
city!"
He	was	still	cheerful	and	somewhat	foppish	after	last	night.
"Ziggie,	my	dear,	he's	no	theoretician,	he's	a	practitioner!	Apparently,	Francis
says,	he	shook	hands	with	Valek!"
Fortunately,	the	old	butler	hadn't	told	everything,	and,	as	far	as	I	could	tell,	my
uncle	hadn't	been	informed	of	what	had	happened.	I	pretended	that	I	hadn't	heard
either,	I	chuckled	(oh,	how	often	life	makes	us	chuckle),	I	said	something	about
Kneadus'	leftist	ideology,	and	so,	for	the	time	being,	the	whole	affair	came	to
nothing.	Of	course	no	one	talked	with	Kneadus	about	it.	We	played	
King—	
a
card	game	Zosia	had	suggested,	it	would	have	been	rude	to	refuse—and	the
game	held	us	in	its	grip	until	dinner.	Zosia,	Zygmunt,	Kneadus,	and	I,	all	of	us
bored	yet	laughing,	laid	out	the	cards	on	the	green	felt,	higher	denominations	on
lower,	by	color,	hearts	were	trump.	Zygmunt	played	with	precision—an	austere
game,	as	if	he	were	at	his	club,	a	cigarette	between	his	lips—he	threw	his	cards
horizontally,	aiming	accurately	at	the	stack,	and	his	white	fingers	picked	up	the
tricks	with	a	snapping	sound.	Kneadus	licked	his	fingers,	kneaded	the	cards,	and
I	noticed	that	he	was	embarrassed,	playing	such	a	lordly	game	as	
King,	
he
repeatedly	looked	at	the	door,	wondering	whether	the	farmhand	saw	this—he
would	have	preferred	to	sit	on	the	floor	and	play	
Dummie.	
Above	all	I	feared
dinnertime	because	I	was	almost	certain	that	Kneadus	would	not	be	able	to
handle	an	encounter	at	the	table	with	the	farmhand—my	fears	turned	out	to	be
justified.
We	were	served	
bigos	
as	an	appetizer,	then	clear	tomato	soup,	veal	cutlets,	pearsin	vanilla	sauce—all	prepared	with	the	cook's	coarse	fingers,	while	the	servants
waited	on	us	t	i	p	t	o	e	i	n	g—Francis	in	white	gloves,	the	farmhand	barefoot,	a
napkin	over	his	arm.
{11}
	Kneadus	looked	pale	and,	his	eyes	downcast,	ate	the
fine,	carefully	chosen	dishes	that	Valek	placed	before	him,	miserable	that	the
farmhand	was	feeding	him	such	delicacies.	To	make	matters	worse,	my	aunt,	in
an	attempt	to	gently	make	Kneadus	aware	of	the	impropriety	of	his	excesses	in
the	pantry,	treated	him	with	extreme	politeness,	she	asked	him	about	family
matters	and	about	his	departed	father.	Forced	to	turn	well rounded	phrases
Kneadus	was	in	torment,	speaking	to	her	softly	so	that	the	farmhand	wouldn't
overhear,	not	daring	to	look	in	Valek's	direction.	And	perhaps	that's	why,	when
dessert	was	served,	instead	of	answering	my	aunt,	he	lost	himself	in	longing,	a
meek	smile	on	his	squeaky thin	mug—the	dessert	spoon	idling	in	his	hand.	I
couldn't	nudge	him	because	I	was	sitting	on	the	far	side	of	the	table.	My	aunt	fell
silent,	while	the	farmhand	burst	into	an	embarrassed,	peasant	guffaw,	as	peasants
are	wont	to	do	when	their	lo'dships	are	lookin'	at	us,	and	he	covered	his	mouth
with	his	hand.	The	butler	boxed	his	ear.	Right	at	this	moment	my	uncle	lit	a
cigarette	and	was	inhaling	the	smoke.	Did	he	see	what	had	just	happened?	It	was
so	obvious	that	I	was	afraid	he	would	tell	Kneadus	to	leave	the	table.
But	instead,	Konstanty	let	the	smoke	out	through	his	nose	rather	than	his	mouth!
"Wine!"	he	exclaimed,	"wine!	Oh,	let	us	have	wine!"
All	of	a	sudden	his	spirits	seemed	to	rise,	he	sprawled	on	his	chair	and	drummed
on	the	table	with	his	fingers.
"Wine!	Tell	them,	Francis,	to	bring	that	'granny	Henry'	from	the	cellar—we'll
have	a	sip!	Valek,	coffee—black!	Cigars!	Let's	light	up	a	cigar—to	hell	with
cigarettes!"
And,	drinking	to	Kneadus,	he	began	to	reminisce	about	days	gone	by	when	he
used	to	go	pheasant	hunting	with	Prince	Severyn.	And,	drinking	especially	to
Kneadus	and	to	no	one	else,	he	went	on	talking	about	a	barber	at	the	Bristol
Hotel,	the	best	barber	he'd	ever	encountered.	He	became	lively,	excited,	while
the	servants	doubled	their	attention	and,	with	their	peasant	fingers,	swiftly	filled
our	glasses	with	wine.	Kneadus,	looking	like	a	corpse,	a	glass	in	his	hand,	drank
to	my	uncle	Konstanty,	he	was	in	torment,	not	knowing	why	he	deserved	such
unexpected	attention,	but	he	had	to	imbibe	the	old,	delicate,	fusty	wine	with	its
fine	bouquet	right	in	Valek's	presence.	I	too	wondered	about	my	uncle's
unexpected	reaction.	After	dinner	he	took	me	by	the	arm	and	led	me	to	the
smoking	room."Your	friend,"	he	said	in	his	most	aristocratic	tone	and	with	experience	in	his
voice,	"he's	a	pede...	pede...	Hmm...	He's	after	Valek!	Did	you	notice	that?	Ho,
ho.	Well,	let's	hope	the	ladies	don't	get	wind	of	this.	Prince	Severyn	also	had	his
moments!"
He	stretched	his	long	legs.	Oh,	he	delivered	this	with	a	truly	aristocratic	and
masterful	skill!	With	that	lordly	finesse	to	which	four	hundred	waiters,	seventy
barbers,	thirty	jockeys,	and	the	same	number	of	maitre	d's	had	contributed,	oh,
with	what	pleasure	did	he	bring	into	relief	a	
bon	vivant's,	a	grand	seigneur's
peppery,	restaurant	knowledge	of	life!	This	is	how	truly	high bred	lordliness,
when	it	hears	of	something	like	sexual	perversion	or	intemperance,	displays	its
masculine	knowledge	of	life,	which	it	has	learned	from	waiters	and	barbers.	My
uncle's	peppery,	restaurant	wisdom	infuriated	me,	I	was	like	a	dog	maddened	by
a	cat,	I	was	shaken	by	the	cynical	simplicity	with	which	he	offered	such	a	facile
and	lordly	interpretation	of	the	incident.	I	forgot	all	my	fears.	Out	of	sheer	spite	I
told	him	everything!	May	God	forgive	me—impelled	by	his	restaurant	maturity	I
tumbled	into	greenery,	and	I	resolved	to	treat	him	to	a	dish	that	was	more
undercooked	than	any	of	those	he'd	ever	eaten	in	a	restaurant.
"It's	not	at	all	what	you	think,	uncle,"	I	replied	innocently,	"he	was	just	fra	...
ternizing."
"Fraternizing?"	Konstanty	said,	surprised,	"what	do	you	mean fraternizing?
What	do	you	mean	by	'fraternizing'?"	Thus	unsaddled,	he	looked	at	me	askance.
"Fra	...	ternizing,"	I	replied,	"he	wanted	to	fra	...	ternize."
"Fraternize	with	Valek?	How	do	you	mean—fraternize?	Perhaps	you	mean—stir
up	the	servants?	An	agitator?	Bolshevism—eh?"
"No,	fraternizing	like	one	young	fellow	with	another."
My	uncle	stood	up	and	shook	the	ashes	from	his	cigar—he	fell	silent,	searching
for	words.
"Fraternizing,"	he	repeated,	"he's	fraternizing	with	peasantry,	eh?"	He	tried	to
give	it	a	name,	to	make	it	passable	in	a	worldly,	social,	experiential	sense,
because	a	purely	boyish	fraternization	was	unacceptable,	he	felt	that	he	wouldn't
have	been	served	this	in	a	good	restaurant.	He	was	highly	irritated	by	my
following	Kneadus'	example	and	pronouncing	"fra	.	.	.	ternizing"	with	a	touch	of
a	shy	and	embarrassed	stammer.	This	floored	him	totally.
"He's	fraternizing	with	peasantry?"	he	asked	gingerly.
To	which	I	replied:	"No,	he's	fraternizing	with	the	boy."
"Fraternizing	with	the	boy?	Which	means	what?	He	wants	to	play	ball	with	him,or	what?"
"No.	To	be	his	buddy,	like	a	boy—they're	fraternizing	like	one	boy	with	another
boy."	My	uncle's	face	turned	red,	probably	for	the	first	time	since	he	started
shaving,	oh,	that	
à	rebour	
blush	of	a	grown	up	man	about	town	in	relation	to	a
naive	youth!—he	pulled	out	his	watch,	looked	at	it,	and	wound	it	up,	searching
all	the	while	for	a	scientific,	political,	economic,	or	medical	term	in	which	he
could	box	up,	under	lock	and	key,	this	sentimentally	slippery	matter.	"A
perversion,	is	it?	Eh?	Some	complex?	He's	fra	.	.	.	ternizing?	Maybe	he's	a
socialist,	a	member	of	the	Polish	Socialist	Party?	A	democrat,	eh?	He's	fra	.	.	.
ternizing?	
Mais	qu'est	que	c'est	
fra	.	.	.	ternizing?	
Comment	
fra	.	.	.	ternizing?
Fraternité,	quoi,	égalité,	liberté?"	
He	began	in	French,	yet	he	was	not	being
truculent,	but	rather	like	someone	who	is	hiding	and	literally	"running	for
recourse"	to	the	French	language.	He	was	helpless	in	relation	to	the	young
fellow.	He	lit	his	cigarette	and	put	it	out	again,	he	crossed	his	legs,	stroked	his
moustache.
"He's	fraternizing?	
What	is	that
{12}
	fra...	ternizing?	Damn	it!	Prince	Severyn..."
I	went	on	gently	and	doggedly	repeating	"fra...	ternizing,"	and	I	wouldn't	have
passed	up	for	anything	the	green,	soft	naivete	that	I	was	smearing	all	over	my
dear	uncle.
"Kostie,"	auntie	said	kind heartedly,	as	she	stood	on	the	threshold	with	a	bag	of
candies	in	her	hand,	"don't	be	upset,	he's	probably	fraternizing	in	Christ,
fraternizing	in	brotherly	love."
"No!"	I	answered	stubbornly.	"No!	He	fra	.	.	.	ternizes	nakedly,	without
anything!"
"So	he's	a	pervert	after	all!"	Konstanty	exclaimed.
"Not	at	all.	He	fraternizes	without	anything,	and	without	perversion.	He
fraternizes	like	a	boy."
"A	boy?	A	boy?	But	what	does	it	mean?	
Pardon,	mais	qu'est ce	que	c'est—	
boy,"
he	played	dumb,	"as	a	boy	with	Valek?	In	my	house—	with	Valek?	With	my
lackey?"	He	got	mad	and	pressed	the	bell.	"I'll	show	you	the	boy!"
The	valet	ran	into	the	room.	My	uncle	went	up	to	him,	his	arm	drawn	back,	and
he	might	have	given	him	a	swift	smack	in	the	mug	without	even	having	to	wind
up,	but	he	stopped	halfway,	disoriented,	tottering	inwardly,	and	he	couldn't	hit
him,	he	could	not	make	connection	with	Valek's	mug	under	these	circumstances.
To	hit	the	boy	just	because	he	was	a	boy?	To	hit	him	because	he	was
"fraternizing"?	It	was	out	of	the	question.	And	Konstanty,	who	would	have	hithim	for	spilling	coffee,	dropped	his	arm.
"Out!"	he	yelled.
"Kostie!"	exclaimed	auntie,	all	heart,	"Kostie!"
"It's	no	use,"	I	said.	"On	the	contrary,	punching	the	valet	in	the	snoot	will	only
encourage	Kneadus	to	fra...	ternize.	If	someone	gets	it	in	the	snoot—Kneadus
loves	him	all	the	more."
My	uncle	blinked	as	though	he	were	brushing	a	caterpillar	off	his	waistcoat	but
said	nothing;	attacked	by	ironic	naivete	from	below,	this	virtuoso	of	drawing 
room	and	restaurant	irony	behaved	like	a	fencing	master	who	is	being	accosted
by	a	duck.	The	worldly	country	squire	proved	childishly	naive	when	faced	with
naivete.	What's	more	interesting—in	spite	of	his	knowledge	and	experience	of
life,	it	didn't	occur	to	him	that	I	could	be	on	Kneadus'	and	Valek's	side	against
him,	and	that	I	could	enjoy	his	lordly	fits	and	spasms—it	was	characteristic	of
him	to	hold	fast	to	the	loyalty	of	the	higher	social	class,	which	did	not	allow
treason	in	its	own	circles.	Old	Francis	came	in	wearing	his	coattails,	shaved,
with	sideburns,	and	he	stood	in	the	center	of	the	room.
Konstanty,	somewhat	ruffled,	resumed	his	nonchalant	attitude.
"What	is	it,	my	dear	Francis?"	he	graciously	asked,	but	in	his	voice	there	was	a
lord's	regard	for	an	old,	seasoned	servant,	as	there	would	be	for	an	old,	dry
Hungarian	wine.	"What's	on	your	mind,	Francis?"	The	old	servant	looked	at	me,
but	my	uncle	waved	his	hand.	"You	can	speak	up."
"Did	your	lordship	talk	to	Valek?"
"Ah,	yes	I	did,	I	did,	my	dear	Francis."
"I	just	wanted	to	be	sure	that	your	lordship	had	talked	to	him.	If	it	were	me,	your
lordship,	I	wouldn't	have	kept	him	another	minute!	I	would	have	thrown	him	out
on	his	face.	He	got	too	familiar	with	your	lordships!	People	are	already	gabbing,
your	lordship!"
Three	wenches	ran	through	the	courtyard,	their	bare	legs	flashing.	A	lame	dog
ran	after	them,	barking.	Zygmunt	slipped	out	into	the	smoking	room.
"They're	gabbing?"	uncle	Konstanty	asked.	"What	are	they	saying?"
"Their	gabbing	about	your	lordships!"
"They're	gabbing	about	us?"
Fortunately	the	old	servant	didn't	want	to	say	anything	more.
"They're	gabbing	about	your	lordships,"	he	said.	"Valek	got	familiar	with	the
young	master	who	has	just	arrived,	so	now,	begging	your	pardon,	sir,	they'regabbing	about	your	lordships	without	any	respect.	Mostly	Valek	and	the	wenches
in	the	kitchen.	I	myself	heard	them	gabbing	with	the	young	master	till	late	at
night,	they	gabbed	about	everything.	They're	gabbing	for	all	their	worth,
anything	they	can	think	of!	They're	gabbing,	it's	terrible!	I'd	kick	the	scoundrel
out	on	his	face,	your	lordship,	this	very	second."
The	distinguished looking	servant	blushed	like	a	peony,	all	crimson,	oh,	the
blush	of	an	old	butler!	The	lordship's	soft	and	delicate	blush	answered	him.	His
lord and	ladyship	sat	without	a	murmur it	wouldn't	do	to	ask	questions—maybe
the	butler	would	add	something	himself—their	lordships	hung	on	his	words—
but	he	didn't	add	anything.
"All	right,	all	right,	my	dear	Francis,"	uncle	Konstanty	finally	said,	"you	may
leave."
And	the	servant	left	just	as	he	had	come.
"They're	gabbing	about	their	lordships,"	he	had	said,	and	they	didn't	find	out
anything	more.	My	uncle	satisfied	himself	with	a	sour	remark	in	auntie's
direction:	"You're	too	lax	with	the	servants,	my	sweet,	why	are	they	so
undisciplined?	What	drivel!"	With	that	they	turned	to	other	matters,	and,	long
after	the	servant	had	gone,	they	exchanged	banalities	and	trivialities	like:	"where
is	Zosia?"	and	"has	the	mail	arrived?"	and	they	trivialized	the	whole	affair	to
hide	that	Francis'	insinuation	had	struck	their	weak	spot.	After	almost	a	quarter
of	an	hour	of	trivializing,	Konstanty	stretched	himself,	yawned,	and	unhurriedly
crossed	the	parquet	floor	to	the	living	room.	I	suspected	that	he	was	looking	for
Kneadus.	He	must	have	a	talk	with	him,	he	felt	the	pressure	of	an	inner	need	to
have	things	immediately	explained	and	clarified,	he	could	no	longer	endure	these
murky	waters.	Auntie	followed	him.
Kneadus,	however,	was	not	in	the	living	room,	Zosia	was	the	only	one	there,
sitting	with	a	textbook	on	practical	vegetable	farming	on	her	lap,	looking	at	the
wall,	at	a	fly—he	was	neither	in	the	dining	room	nor	in	the	study.	The	entire
farmstead	dozed	in	after dinner	silence,	the	fly	buzzed,	outside	the	hens	circled
on	the	withered	lawns	and	pecked	at	the	ground,	the	little	pinscher	nudged	the
mutt	and	nipped	at	his	tail.	My	uncle,	Zygmunt,	and	auntie	cautiously	dispersed
through	the	house,	each	on	his	own,	searching	for	Kneadus.	It	would	have	been
below	them	to	admit	that	they	were	looking	for	him.	However,	the	sight	of	their
lordships	being	released	into	what	seemed	a	nonchalant,	slow	yet	persistent
motion	was	more	menacing	than	the	hottest	pursuit,	and	I	searched	my	mind	for
a	way	to	avert	the	row	that	was	swelling,	like	an	abscess,	on	the	horizon.	Butthey	seemed	beyond	reach.	They	had	closed	themselves	off.	I	could	no	longer
talk	with	them	about	it.	As	I	crossed	the	dining	room	I	noticed	that	my	aunt
stopped	at	the	door	to	the	butler's	pantry,	through	which	one	could	usually	hear
the	clamor	in	the	kitchen,	the	maids	chattering	and	squealing	as	they	washed	the
dishes.	Pensive	yet	watchful,	she	stood	with	the	look	of	the	mistress	of	the	house
eavesdropping	on	her	servants,	and	her	usual	kindliness	had	disappeared	without
a	trace.	When	she	saw	me	she	coughed	and	walked	away.	At	the	same	time,	my
uncle	strayed	through	the	courtyard	in	the	direction	of	the	kitchen	and	stood	near
a	window,	but	when	one	of	the	kitchen	maids	stuck	her	head	out	the	window,	he
shouted:	"Zielihski!	Tell	Nowak	to	patch	up	that	drainpipe!"	and	he	slowly
strolled	down	an	avenue	of	hornbeams,	gardener	Zielihski	following	him,	cap	in
hand.	Zygmunt	came	up	to	me	and	took	me	by	the	arm.
"I	don't	know	if	you	have	a	taste	for	an	old,	slightly	overripe,	peasant	crone—I
myself	fancy	a	crone—Toby	Patz	started	this	fad—I	love	a	crone—once	in	a
while,	I	must	admit,	I	love	a	crone—	
j'aime	parfois	une	simple	
'crone,'	I	love	a
crone,	damn	it!	I	love	a	crone!	Tra	la	li,	la	li,	la,	I	love	an	ordinary	crone,	must	be
a	bit	on	the	old	side!"
Ah,	yes—he	was	worried	that	the	servants	had	tattled	about	his	old	woman,
about	the	widah	Josie,	with	whom	he	was	cavorting	in	the	bushes	by	the	lake;
and	now	he	was	hiding	behind	the	quirkiness	of	a	fad,	dragging	the	young	Patz
into	it.	I	didn't	answer	him	because	I	realized	that	once	released	into	action,
nothing	could	hold	back	their	lordships	from	quirkiness,	the	star	of	madness	had
again	arisen	in	my	firmament,	and	I	remembered	all	my	adventures	since	that
day	when	Pimko	had	dealt	me	the	pupa—this	one	seemed	to	be	the	worst.	I	went
with	Zygmunt	to	the	courtyard	where	my	uncle	soon	appeared	at	our	end	of	the
lane	of	hornbeams	with	gardener	Zielihski	following	him,	cap	in	hand.
"What	lovely	weather!"	he	exclaimed	in	the	limpid	air,	"it's	dry	at	last."
The	weather	was	indeed	wonderful,	blue	skies	in	the	background,	trees	dripping
with	rusty golden	foliage,	the	pinscher	and	the	mutt	excited	and	shoving	one
another.	No	sign	of	Kneadus.	Auntie	arrived	with	two	mushrooms	on	her	palm,
displaying	them	from	a	distance,	smiling	gently	and	benevolently.	We	gathered
in	front	of	the	porch,	and,	since	not	one	of	us	wanted	to	admit	that	we	were	all
looking	for	Kneadus,	an	unusual	gentleness	and	politeness	supervened.	Auntie,
all	heart,	asked	if	anyone	was	cold.	Jackdaws	sat	on	trees.	Little	peasant	urchins,
their	grimy	fingers	stuck	in	their	mouths,	sat	on	the	gate	of	the	barnyard	and
gawked	at	their	lordships	walking	to	and	fro,	and	they	gabbed	about	somefhin'
until	Zygmunt	stomped	his	foot	and	chased	them	away;	but	they	soon	begangawkin'	through	the	railing,	so	he	chased	them	away	once	more;	whereupon
gardener	Zielinski	drove	them	away	with	rocks—they	took	off,	but	they	gawked
again	from	near	the	well	until	finally	Zygmunt	gave	up,	while	Konstanty	ordered
the	servants	to	bring	apples,	then	showed	off	eating	them,	scattering	the	peels.
He	ate	against	those	peasant	kiddies.
"Tereperepumpum,"	he	murmured.
Still	no	Kneadus,	yet	not	a	word	was	said,	even	though	everyone	desired	some
sort	of	confrontation,	some	explanation.	If	this	was	a	pursuit,	it	was	an	extremely
sluggish	pursuit,	perfectly	nonchalant,	almost	immobile,	and	hence—even	more
threatening.	Lordliness	was	in	pursuit	of	Kneadus,	but	the	lords	and	ladies	hardly
budged.	Nevertheless,	dallying	in	the	courtyard	seemed	pointless,	especially
since	the	kiddies	were	still	gawkin'	through	the	railings,	so	Zygmunt	suggested
that	we	have	a	look	in	the	barn.
"Let's	walk	over	to	the	barnyard,"	he	said,	and	we	slowly	sauntered	in	that
direction,	uncle	Konstanty	with	the	gardener	behind	him,	cap	in	hand—while	the
urchins	moved	their	gawkin'	from	the	railings	to	the	vicinity	of	the	granary.	It
was	muddy	beyond	the	gate,	geese	attacked	us,	the	foreman	pounced	on	them;	a
lame	dog	bared	its	teeth	and	growled,	the	night	watchman	rushed	out	to	chase	it
away.	The	dogs	chained	near	the	stables	began	to	howl	and	growl,	incited	by	the
strangeness	of	our	attire—indeed,	I	was	wearing	a	gray	city	suit,	collar	and	tie,
dress	shoes,	my	uncle	wore	a	tweed	coat,	auntie	had	on	a	black	cape	trimmed
with	fur	over	her	shoulders	and	a	boat shaped	hat,	Zygmunt	wore	Scottish	socks
and	knickers.	It	was	indeed	the	Way	of	the	Cross,	slow,	the	hardest	road	I	had
ever	traveled;	you'll	hear	some	day	about	my	adventures	in	the	prairies	and
among	the	Africans,	but	no	African	could	compare	to	the	peregrination	through
the	Bolimov	barnyard.	No	place	more	exotic	than	this	one.	Nowhere	else—more
noxious	poisons.	Nowhere	else	had	such	unhealthy	phantasms,	and	flowers,
orchids,	bloomed	under	one's	feet—	nowhere	so	many	Oriental	butterflies,	oh!
no	downy	hummingbird	will	ever	equal	in	its	exoticism	a	goose	that	has	never
been	touched	by	hands.	Oh,	because	here	nothing	had	ever	been	touched	by	our
hands,	the	grooms	near	the	barn—untouched,	the	wenches	by	the	granary—
untouched,	untouched	were	the	cattle	and	the	fowl,	and	the	pitchforks,	and	the
whipple trees,	chains,	leather	straps,	and	flour	sacks.	Neither	wild	poultry	nor
mustangs	nor	wild	wenches	nor	wild	pigs.	At	most	the	grooms'	mugs	may	have
been	touched	by	my	uncle's	hand,	and	auntie's	hand	was	touched	by	the	grooms
who	planted	on	it	their	peasant	kisses	of	allegiance.	Otherwise—nothing,
nothing,	and	again	nothing—all	unfamiliar	and	never	experienced	by	us!	Wewere	walking,	flat	on	our	heels,	when	cows	were	driven	in	through	the	gate,	the
huge	herd	goaded	and	prodded	by	ten year old	boys,	totally	filled	the	barnyard,
and	we	found	ourselves	among	those	beasts,	unfamiliar	and	never	experienced
by	us.
"
Attention!"	
auntie	exclaimed.	
"Attention,	laissez	les	passer!
"
"Atasionlesaypasay!	Atasionlesaypasay!"	aped	the	peasant	kiddies	by	the
granary,	but	the	night	watchman	and	the	foreman	moved	swiftly	and	chased
away	the	little	urchins	as	well	as	the	cows.	The	wenches	by	the	barn—never
experienced	by	us—burst	into	a	folk	ditty:	"Hey,	hey ho!"	but	we	couldn't	catch
the	lyrics.	Maybe	they	sang	about	the	young	master?	But	the	most	unpleasant
aspect	of	this	situation	was	that	their	lordships	seemed	to	be	looked	after	by	the
peasants,	and	even	though	they	actually	lorded	over	the	peasants	and	exploited
them,	it	seemed	to	an	outsider	that	the	peasants	coddled	them,	as	if	their
lordships	were	the	yokels'	little	darlings—and	the	foreman,	as	auntie's	slave,
carried	her	across	a	puddle,	and	yet	it	seemed	that	he	was	coddling	her.	Their
lordships	sucked	the	peasantry	dry	of	their	finances,	but	besides	the	fiscal
sucking	they	carried	on	an	infantile	kind	of	sucking,	they	sucked	not	only	their
blood	but	also	their	sweet	milk,	and	no	matter	how	harshly	and	mercilessly	my
uncle	swore	at	the	grooms,	no	matter	how	much,	like	a	mommy,	auntie	let	them
kiss	her	hands	with	matriarchal	kindliness—neither	matriarchal	nor	patriarchal
kindliness,	nor	the	severest	of	commands	could	quell	the	impression	that	the
squire	was	actually	the	peasantry's	little	son,	and	the	squire's	lady—their	little
daughter.	For	indeed,	the	local	peasantry	had	not	yet	been	kneaded	by	the
intelligentsia,	unlike	the	rabble	on	the	outskirts	of	the	city	who	tried	to	escape
from	us	by	turning	into	dogs;	here	the	peasantry	were	primeval	and	intact,	secure
within	themselves,	so	that,	even	passing	them	from	afar,	we	felt	their	power	to
be	like	that	of	hundred	thousand	rampant	work	horses.
By	the	chicken	coop	the	housekeeper	shoved	feed	into	the	gullet	of	an	already
fat	turkey,	satiating	it	beyond	its	limits,	honoring	the	lordly	tastes,	and	preparing
a	tasty	dish	for	their	lordships.	By	the	forge	the	tail	of	a	team colt	was	being	cut
for	fashion's	sake,	while	Zygmunt	patted	its	rump,	checked	its	teeth,	because	a
horse	was	one	of	those	few	things	that	a	young	master	was	allowed	to	touch,	and
the	wenches—unfamiliar	to	us	and	sucked	dry—sang	for	him	even	louder:	"Hey,
hey ho,	hey,	hey ho,	hey ho!"	But	the	thought	of	the	crone	ruined	his	foppery,
and,	dejected,	he	let	go	of	the	horse's	neck	and	mistrustfully	looked	at	the
wenches,	wondering	whether	they	were	laughing	at	him.	An	old,	gnarly	peasant,
also	unfamiliar	and	a	bit	sucked	dry,	walked	up	to	auntie	and	kissed	her	on	thepermitted	body	part.	Our	cortege	finally	reached	the	far	end	of	the	barn.	Beyond
the	barn—a	road,	checkerboard	fields,	a	wide	expanse.	From	far,	far	away
another	sucked dry	peasant	spotted	us	and	stopped	for	a	while	by	his	plow	but
immediately	hit	the	horse	with	a	whip.	The	damp	earth	did	not	allow	sitting
down	nor	continuing	to	sit.	To	their	lordships'	right	little	hand—stubble	fields,
crests	of	earth,	fallow	land,	and	peatbogs,	to	their	left	little	hand—an	evergreen
forest,	coniferous	greenery.	No	sign	of	Kneadus.	A	wild	native	hen	pecked	in	a
field	of	oats.
Suddenly,	a	few	hundred	steps	from	us,	Kneadus	emerged	from	the	forest—not
alone—the	valet	was	by	his	side.	He	hadn't	noticed	us—he	saw	nothing	of	the
world	around	him,	he	was	all	passion,	all ears,	all agog	with	the	farmhand.	He
twirled,	jumped	up	and	down	like	a	pretentious	jackass,	every	now	and	then
grabbing	the	farmhand's	hand	and	looking	into	his	eyes.	The	farmhand	jeered	at
Kneadus	for	all	his	worth	with	a	peasantlike,	bucolic	superchuckle,	and
unceremoniously	slapped	him	on	his	back.	They	walked	skirting	the	edge	of	the
copse,	Kneadus	with	the	farmhand—or	rather,	the	farmhand	with	Kneadus	by	his
side!	Kneadus,	all	passion,	kept	reaching	into	his	pocket	and	shoving	something
into	the	farmhand's	hand,	money,	most	likely,	while	the	farmhand	kept
unceremoniously	poking	him	in	the	ribs.
"They're	drunk!"	auntie	whispered...
No,	not	drunk.	The	ball	of	the	sun,	slowly	descending	in	the	west,	illuminated
and	brought	everything	into	relief.	And,	in	the	setting	sun,	the	farmhand	slapped
Kneadus	on	the	cheek...
A	shout	from	Zygmunt,	like	a	whiplash:
"Valek!"
The	valet	took	to	his	heels	and	headed	into	the	forest.	Kneadus	stopped	in	his
tracks,	all	magic	gone.	We	began	to	walk	toward	him,	cutting	across	a	stubble
field,	and	he	walked	toward	us.	But	Konstanty	didn't	want	to	settle	things	in	the
middle	of	the	field	because	the	peasant	kiddies	were	still	gawkin'	from	the	barn,
and	the	sucked dry	peasant	was	still	plowing.
"Let's	have	a	walk	in	the	forest,"	he	suggested,	suddenly	becoming	exceptionally
polite,	and	we	entered	the	dark	grove	directly	from	the	fields.	Silence.	The
showdown	was	to	take	place	among	firs,	densely	set—we	stood	in	tight
proximity	to	each	other,	very	close	indeed.	Uncle	Konstanty	shook	inwardly,	but
he	doubled	his	politeness.
"I	notice	that	Valek's	company	suits	you,"	he	began	with	subtle	irony.Pale	with	hatred,	Kneadus	replied	in	a	squeaky	voice:
"Yes,	it	suits	me	..."
Tucked	into	a	prickly	fir,	his	mug	screened	by	branches,	like	a	fox	in	a	battue—
two	paces	from	him	auntie	stood	among	the	branches	of	a	little	conifer,	also	my
uncle,	and	Zygmunt...	My	uncle,	however,	approached	the	subject	in	an	icy
manner	with	barely	perceptible	sarcasm.
"You,	sir,	are	apparently	fra...	ternizing	with	Valek?"
A	hateful	and	furious	squeak:
"Yes,	I'm	fra	...	ternizing!"
"Kostie,"	Auntie	kindly	remarked,	"let's	go.	It's	damp	here."
"This	grove	is	rather	dense.	We	should	cut	every	third	tree,"	Zygmunt	said	to	his
father.
"I'm	fra	.	.	.	ternizing!"	Kneadus	whimpered.	I	had	no	idea	they	would	subject
him	to	such	torture.	Is	this	why	they	sidled	into	the	grove—to	pretend	to	be
deaf?	Is	this	why	they	pursued	him,	so	that,	having	seized	him,	they	could	give
vent	to	their	disdain?	How	about	the	explanations?	How	about	a	showdown?
They	perfidiously	reversed	roles,	they	weren't	settling	with	him	at	all—they	were
haughty,	and	in	such	a	hurry	to	show	him	their	disdain	that	they	gave	up	on
clarifications.	They	made	everything	look	trivial.	They	were	snubbing	him.	They
hardly	noticed	him—oh,	their	lordships,	furious	and	despicable!
"And	you,	sir,	scrambled	up	the	gamekeeper!"	Kneadus	exclaimed,	"you
scrambled	up	the	gamekeeper	because	you	were	afraid	of	the	boar!	I	know	all
about	it!	Everybody's	talking!	Tereperepumpum!	Tereperepumpum,"	he	said,
aping	my	uncle,	in	his	fury	he	lost	any	remaining	self control.
Konstanty	tightened	his	lips	and—silence	fell.
"Valek	will	be	kicked	out	on	his	ass!"	Zygmunt	said	coldly	to	his	father.
"Yes,	Valek	will	be	dismissed,"	uncle	Konstanty	took	up	coldly.	"I'm	sorry,	but
I'm	not	in	the	habit	of	putting	up	with	demoralized	servants."
They	were	taking	revenge	on	Valek!	Oh,	perfidious	and	despicable	lordships,
they	wouldn't	even	respond	to	Kneadus	and	were	sacking	Valek	instead—they
struck	at	Kneadus	through	Valek.	Didn't	old	Francis	do	the	same	when,	in	the
butler's	pantry,	he	didn't	say	a	word	to	Kneadus,	but	gave	hell	to	Valek	and	the
wench	instead?	The	fir	trembled,	and	I	was	about	to	jump	at	their	throats—when
suddenly	the	gamekeeper,	in	a	green,	short,	close fitting	jacket,	his	shotgun	over
his	shoulder,	emerged	out	of	the	thicket,	close	to	us,	and	saluted	us	with	all	due
formality."Clamber	up	him,	you!"	Kneadus	exclaimed.	"You	there,	clamber	up	him,	a
boar's	coming!	A	boar!!!...	The	crone,	Josie	the	crone!"	he	hurled	at	Zygmunt,
and	took	off	into	the	woods	like	a	madman.	I	dashed	after	him.	"Kneadus,
Kneadus!"	I	shouted	in	vain,	the	firs	whipped	and	lashed	my	face!	I	absolutely
did	not	want	him	to	be	alone	in	the	forest.	I	jumped	over	ravines	and	hollows,
burrows,	crevices,	roots.	From	the	grove	we	ran	into	a	thick	forest,	he	doubled
his	speed	and	ran,	he	ran	like	a	crazed	boar!
I	suddenly	saw	Zosia,	who	was	taking	a	walk	through	the	woods	and,	bored,	was
picking	mushrooms	among	the	mosses.	We	were	heading	toward	her,	and	I	was
scared	that	in	his	madness	he	might	harm	her.	"Run!"	I	screamed.	My	voice	must
have	sounded	urgent,	for	she	took	to	her	heels—and	Kneadus,	realizing	she	was
running	away,	began	to	chase	her,	and	to	catch	up	with	her!	With	a	final	sprint	I
tried	to	reach	him	just	as	he	almost	caught	up	with	her—	luckily	he	tripped	on	a
root	and	fell	in	a	small	clearing.	I	ran	up	to	him.
"What	do	you	want?"	he	growled,	pressing	his	face	against	the	mosses,	"what	do
you	want?"
"Come	home!"
"Yer	lo'dships!"	he	spat	the	words	through	his	teeth,	"yer	lo'dships!	Go	away,	go!
You're	too—a	lo'dship!"
"No,	no!"
"Oh	yeah?	You's	yer	lo'dship	too!	Yer	lo'dship!"
"Come	home,	Kneadus—stop	it!	This	is	bound	to	lead	to	disaster!	We	have	to
stop	it,	end	it—there	must	be	some	other	way!"
"Yer	lo'dship!	Yer	lo'dships,	damn	it!	They	won't	let	oop!	They're	curs!	O	Jesus!
They're	twistin'	ya	round	too!"
"Cut	it	out,	this	isn't	your	language!	Why	do	you	talk	like	this?	Why	to	me?"
"He's	moin,	moin	...	Ah	won't	let	'em!	He's	moin!	Leave	him	alone!	They	wanna
throw	Valek	out!	Throw	him	out!	Ah	won't	let	'em—he's	moin—ah	won't	let
'em!..."
"Come	home!"
What	an	inglorious	homecoming!	He	moaned	and	groaned,	he	mooned	in	sylvan
lamentation—"oh,	woe's	me,	oh,	woe's	me!"	The	wenches	by	the	barn	and	the
grooms	scratched	their	heads	and	marveled	at	the	young	master	wailing	in	their
tongue.	It	was	dusk	by	the	time	we	crept	in	through	the	back	porch;	I	told	him	to
wait	in	our	room	upstairs	while	I	went	to	talk	things	over	with	uncle	Konstanty.	I
ran	into	Zygmunt	in	the	smoking	room	where,	hands	in	his	pockets,	he	walkedfrom	one	side	of	the	room	to	the	other.	The	young	master	was	fuming	within	but
was	stiff	without.	I	learned	from	his	dry	account	that	Zosia	ran	back	from	the
forest	barely	alive	and,	it	seemed,	caught	a	cold,	auntie	was	taking	the	girl's
temperature.	Valek,	who	was	back	in	the	kitchen,	was	forbidden	entry	to	the
rooms,	and	early	tomorrow	morning	he	would	be	sacked	and	kicked	out.
Zygmunt	noted,	moreover,	that	he	was	not	holding	me	responsible	for	"Mr.
Kneadalski's"	disgraceful	behavior,	and,	in	his	opinion,	I	should	be	more	careful
in	the	choice	of	my	friends.	He	regretted	that	he	would	no	longer	have	the
pleasure	of	my	company,	but	he	did	not	think	that	any	further	stay	in	Bolimov
would	be	pleasant	for	us.	Tomorrow	morning	at	nine	o'clock	there	is	a	train	that
goes	to	Warsaw,	the	coachman	has	been	given	his	orders.	As	for	supper,	we
would	surely	prefer	to	eat	in	our	room	upstairs,	Francis	has	already	been	duly
instructed.	Zygmunt	informed	me	of	all	this	in	a	tone	that	allowed	for	no
discussion,	semi officially,	and	in	his	role	as	the	son	of	his	parents.
"As	for	me,"	he	said	through	his	teeth,	"I	will	respond	in	my	own	way.	I	will,
forthwith,	take	the	liberty	of	punishing	Mr.	Kneadalski	for	insulting	my	father
and	my	sister.	I	belong	to	the	fraternity	Astoria."
That's	how	he	spat	out	the	threat	of	a	slap	in	the	face!	I	knew	what	he	was	up	to.
He	wanted	to	discredit	the	face	that	had	been	hit	in	the	mug	by	peasantry,	he
wanted,	by	hitting	it,	to	remove	it	from	the	list	of	lordly	and	honorable	faces.
Fortunately,	uncle	Konstanty	heard	these	threats	as	he	came	into	the	room.
"What	do	you	mean	by	'Mr.	Kneadalski'?"	he	exclaimed.	"Who	is	it	you	want	to
slap	in	the	face,	my	dear	Zygmunt?	A	callow,	school age	whippersnapper?
Spank	the	brat's	pupa	instead!"—and	Zygmunt	blushed	and	faltered	in	his
honorable	undertaking.	After	hearing	my	uncle's	words	he	couldn't	slap	the	face,
he,	a	twenty two year old,	really	couldn't	honorably	hit	the	green	youth,	barely
eighteen	years	old,	especially	since	the	"eighteen year old"	aspect	had	been
underscored	and	brought	into	relief.	The	worst	of	it	was	that	Kneadus	was
actually	at	a	transitional	age,	and,	while	their	lordships	could	consider	him	a
mere	pup,	to	the	peasantry,	which	matures	earlier,	he	was	a	fully	fledged
lordship,	his	face	had	for	them	the	full	value	of	a	lord's	countenance.	How	was	it
then—a	face	good	enough	for	Valek	to	hit	as	a	lord's	face,	but	not	good	enough
to	give	their	lordships	satisfaction?	Zygmunt	looked	at	his	father	with	fury	for
this	injustice	of	nature.	However,	Konstanty	wouldn't	even	entertain	the	thought
that	Kneadus	was	anything	but	a	brat,	Konstanty,	who	at	dinnertime	drank	to
Kneadus	like	a	fellow	traveler	on	homoerotic	terrain,	was	now	denying	all
commonality	with	him,	and	treated	him	like	a	green	youth,	a	brat,	and	used	hisage	to	trivialize	him!	His	pride	wouldn't	let	him	behave	otherwise!	His	race	was
in	revolt,	his	race!	This	lord	whom	History,	in	its	merciless	progression,	was
depriving	of	his	estates	and	of	his	power,	had	remained	after	all	a	thoroughbred
in	body	and	soul,	but	particularly	in	body!	He	could	endure	agricultural	reform
and	legal	and	political	equalization	in	a	general	sense,	but	his	blood	boiled	at	the
thought	of	personal	and	physical	equality,	at	fra	.	.	.	ternization	of	his	person.	At
this	point	equalization	encroached	upon	the	most	murky	recesses	of	his	person—
into	the	primeval	backwoods	of	race,	which	were	guarded	by	an	instinctual,
hateful	reflex,	by	disgust,	horror,	and	abomination!	Let	them	take	away	his
estate!	Let	them	introduce	reforms!	But	don't	expect	his	lordship's	hand	to	seek
out	the	farmhand's	hand,	let	not	his	noble	cheeks	seek	out	the	boorish	hand.	To
strive	toward	peasantry	out	of	sheer	longing	for	them,	how	can	that	be?	Isn't	that
betrayal	of	one's	race—this	adulation	of	servants,	this	naive	and	downright
adulation	of	a	servant's	body	parts,	movements,	and	utterances,	this	love	of	a
yokel's	very	existence?	And	what	would	be	the	position	of	a	lord	whose	servant
was	the	subject	of	such	flagrant	tribute	from	another	lord—no,	no,	Kneadus
wasn't	even	a	lord,	he	was	an	ordinary	green	youth	and	a	sniveling	brat!	These
were	bratty	excesses	resulting	from	Bolshevik	propaganda.
"I	can	see	that	Bolshevik	trends	hold	sway	among	the	school	youth,"	he	spoke	as
if	Kneadus	were	a	revolutionary	schoolboy	and	not	a	lover	of	another	race.
"Spank	his	pupa!"	he	laughed,	"spank	him!"
And	suddenly	shuffling	and	squealing	came	through	the	halfopen	casement	from
the	bushes	by	the	kitchen.	It	was	a	warm	evening,	Saturday	.	.	.	Farmhands	from
outlying	cottages	were	visiting	the	kitchen	wenches	and	necking	.	.	.	Konstanty
stuck	his	head	out	the	window.
"Who's	there?"	he	shouted.	"Off	with	you,	I	forbid	you	to	be	there!"
Someone	darted	into	the	thicket.	Someone	laughed.	A	stone	spun	in	hard	under
the	window.	And	someone	beyond	the	bushes,	in	a	voice	changed	intentionally,
shrieked	to	high	heaven:
A	wagtail,	a	wagtail	wags	on	a	tree	Who's	slapped	in	the	mug,	who	can	it	be?
His	lo'dship,	hee,	hee!
And	once	more	someone	squeaked	and	laughed!	The	peasantry	got	wind	of
everything.	They	knew	what	had	happened.	The	kitchen	wenches	had	spilled	the
woid	to	the	farmhands.	It	was	to	be	expected,	yet	the	squire's	nerves	couldn't
stand	the	impudence	with	which	they	were	singing	under	his	windows.	He
stopped	trifling,	red	blotches	appeared	on	his	cheeks,	and,	without	a	word,	hetook	out	a	pistol.	Fortunately,	auntie	appeared	in	the	nick	of	time.
"Kostie,	dear,"	she	called	out	with	kindliness,	wasting	no	time	on	questions,
"Kostie,	put	it	down!	Put	it	down!	Put	it	down,	I	beg	you,	I	hate	loaded	weapons,
if	you	want	to	have	it	by	your	side,	at	least	unload	it!"
And,	just	as	a	moment	ago	he	had	trivialized	Zygmunt's	threats,	so	auntie	was
now	trivializing	him.	She	kissed	him—he	was	being	kissed	while	holding	a
pistol	in	his	hand—she	adjusted	his	tie,	thus	totally	invalidating	the	pistol,	she
closed	the	casement	because	of	drafts,	and	with	other	similar	actions	she
tirelessly	belittled	and	itsy bitsied	everything.	She	cast	onto	the	balance	of
events	the	rotundity	of	her	person,	aglow	with	a	gentle,	motherly	warmth,	which
swathed	her	like	a	wad	of	cotton	wool.	She	took	me	aside	and	furtively	gave	me
some	candy	that	she	kept	in	a	small	bag.
"Oh,	you	rascals,	you,"	she	whispered	with	a	kindly	reproach,	"what	mischief
you've	created!	Zosia	is	sick,	your	uncle	is	upset,	oh	dear,	this	love	affair	with
the	peasantry!	You	need	to	know	how	to	treat	the	servants,	you	can't	hobnob
with	them,	you	need	to	know	them—these	people	are	like	children,	ignorant	and
immature.	Your	aunt	and	uncle	Stas'	son	Kiki	also	went	through	a	phase	when	he
blindly	idealized	the	peasantry,"	she	added,	scrutinizing	my	face,	"you	even	look
like	him,	yes,	here,	at	the	corners	of	your	nose.	Well,	I'm	not	cross	with	you,	but
don't	come	down	for	supper	because	your	uncle	doesn't	wish	it,	I'll	send	up	a
little	dish	of	fruit	preserves	as	a	consolation—and	do	you	remember	how	our
former	butler,	Ladislas,	gave	you	a	thrashing	because	you	called	him	a	slob?
What	a	mean	man,	that	Ladislas!	I'm	still	shaking	when	I	think	of	it!	I	dismissed
him	on	the	spot.	Imagine	hitting	such	a	little	angel!	My	little	treasure!	My	all	and
everything!	My	thousandfold	darling!"
In	a	sudden	surge	of	mawkishness	she	kissed	me	and	again	gave	me	candy.	I
quickly	walked	away	with	the	candy	of	my	childhood	in	my	mouth,	and,	as	I	did
so,	I	heard	her	ask	Zygmunt	to	take	her	pulse,	and	the	young	master	took	her
wrist	and,	looking	at	his	watch,	took	her	pulse—he	took	the	pulse	of	his	mother
who,	having	slumped	into	a	sofa,	gazed	into	space.	As	I	was	returning	upstairs
with	the	candy,	I	had	a	feeling	of	unreality,	because	in	relation	to	this	woman
everyone	became	unreal,	she	had	a	strange	knack	for	melting	people	with	her
kindness,	of	dunking	them	in	illnesses	and	confusing	them	with	other	people's
body	parts—was	it	out	of	her	fear	of	the	servants,	by	any	chance?	"She's	good	so
she	can	put	the	squeeze	on	us"—I	remembered	Valek	saying.	"She	puts	the
squeeze	on	us,	so	why	shouldn't	she	be	kindly?"	The	situation	was	becoming
dangerous.	They	trivialized	each	other,	my	uncle	out	of	pride,	auntie	out	of	fear,thanks	to	all	of	which	there	had	been	no	shooting	thus	far—	neither	had
Zygmunt	hit	Kneadus,	nor	had	my	uncle	fired	his	pistol.	I	was	anticipating	our
departure	with	joy.
I	found	Kneadus	on	the	floor,	his	head	tucked	between	his	arms—
he	now	gave	himself	to	covering	his	head,	wrapping	and	enfolding	it	in	his	arms,
he	didn't	move,	and	with	his	head	tucked	in,	he	plaintively	sang	of	youth	and
meadows.
"Hey a,	hey,"	he	mumbled,	"hoy,	hoy,	hoy a	hoy!"	and	other	words	without
rhyme	or	reason,	words	gray	and	coarse	like	the	earth,	green	like	a	young	hazel
tree,	peasantlike,	rustic	and	callow.	He	lost	all	sense	of	shame.	Even	when
Francis	came	in	with	our	supper	he	didn't	stop	his	lamentation,	nor	his	quiet,
pastoral	moans;	he	had	reached	the	point	where	he	was	no	longer	ashamed	of
longing	for	the	servants	in	their	presence,	nor	sighing	for	the	valet	in	front	of	the
old	butler.	Never	before	had	I	seen	anyone	from	the	intelligentsia	sink	so	low.
Francis	didn't	look	his	way,	but	his	hands	shook	with	disgust	when	he	placed	our
tray	on	the	table,	and	he	slammed	the	door	as	he	left.	Kneadus	didn't	take	a
single	bite,	he	was	inconsolable—something	in	him	went	on	a chattin',	a 
croakin',	a longin'	and	yearnin',	in	mist	envelopin',	he	scuffled	and	tussled,	he
groaned,	some	kin'a	laws	deducin'	.	.	.	Now	and	then	a	pure	and	simple	vulgar
fury	would	catch	him	by	the	throat.	He	blamed	my	aunt	and	uncle	for	his	debacle
with	the	farmhand,	it	was	their	lo'dships'	fault,	yes,	their	lo'dships',	if	it	weren't
for	their	interference	and	meddling,	he	surely	would	have	fra	.	.	.	ternized!	Why
did	they	stand	in	his	way?	Why	sack	Valek?	I	tried	in	vain	to	convince	him	that
we	had	to	leave	the	next	day.
"Ah'm	not	leavin',	ah	tell	ya,	ah'm	not	leavin',	ah	tell	ya!	Let	'em	leave,	if	they
wanna!	Here's	Valek,	here's	me	too.	Wit'	Valek!	Wit'	me	very	own	Valek,	hey,
hey ho,	ho,	wit'	me	farmhand!"
I	couldn't	communicate	with	him,	lost	as	he	was	in	the	farmhand,	all	earthly
considerations	having	gone	by	the	boards.	When	he	finally	understood	that	it
was	impossible	for	us	to	stay,	in	terror	he	begged	me	not	to	leave	the	farmhand
behind.
"Ah'm	not	leavin'	wit'out	Valek!	Ah'm	not	leavin'	Valek	to	'em!	Let's	take	him—
ah'll	work	for	our	livin',	for	our	home—ah'll	drop	dead	before	ah	leave	this	Valek
of	moin!	For	chrissake,	Joey,	not	wi'out	Valek!	If	they	throw	us	outa'	the	estate,
ah'll	find	me	a	place	in	the	village,	at	the	crone's,"	he	added	with	venom,	"ah'll
settle	in	wit'	the	crone!	How	about	that?!	They	won't	chase	me	outa'	the	village!Anyone	has	the	roit	to	live	in	the	village!"
I	had	no	idea	what	to	do	with	this	conundrum.	It	was	not	outside	the	realm	of
possibility	that	he	would	move	in	with	Zygmunt's	hapless	crone,	the	
widah,	
as
the	valet	had	called	her,	and	he	would	harass	the	manor	and	humiliate	my	aunt
and	uncle,	and	squeal	on	the	secrets	of	the	manor	in	this	vulgar	tongue—a	traitor
and	an	informer—and	a	laughingstock	for	the	yokels!
Suddenly,	in	the	courtyard	just	outside	the	window,	we	heard	a	tremendous	slap
in	the	face.	Everything	jangled,	the	dogs	barked	as	one.	We	pressed	our	noses	to
the	windows.	On	the	porch,	in	the	light	coming	from	the	house,	uncle	Konstanty
stood	with	a	rifle,	gazing	into	darkness.	He	brought	the	weapon	up	to	his	cheek
and	fired	again—the	bang	sounded	in	the	night	like	a	rocket.	It	rang	out	into	the
distance	over	the	dark	reaches	of	the	land.	The	dogs	ran	riot.
"He's	shootin'	at	the	fa'mhand!"	Kneadus	clutched	at	me,	"he's	aimin'	at	the
fa'mhand!"
Konstanty	was	firing	warning	shots.	Had	the	farm	servants	sung	something
more?	Or	did	he	fire	because	his	nerves	gave	out,	or	because	he'd	been	primed	to
shoot	from	the	moment	he	took	his	pistol	from	the	drawer	in	the	smoking	room?
Who	knows	what	went	on	inside	him?	Did	this	act	of	terror	arise	from
haughtiness	and	pride?	The	angered	lord	was	announcing	with	a	boom	far	away
and	down	the	most	distant	roads,	to	the	lone	willows	along	country	lanes,	that	he
stands	guard,	fully	armed.	Auntie	ran	onto	the	porch	and	quickly	offered	him
candy,	she	flung	a	scarf	around	his	neck	and	pulled	him	into	the	house.	But	the
boom	had	already	spread	beyond	recall.	When	the	dogs	on	the	estate	calmed
down	for	a	moment,	I	heard	the	faraway	response	of	the	dogs	in	the	village,	and
for	a	moment	I	imagined	the	peasants'	excitement—the	farmhands,	the	wenches,
and	the	peasants	asking	each	other	"what's	goin'	on,	why	are	they	shootin'	at	the
manor?	Is	it	his	lo'dship	shootin'?	Why's	he	shootin'?"	Then	the	tittle tattle	about
the	mug slapping,	that	the	young	master	Kneadus	got	it	in	the	snoot	from	Valek
amplifying	from	one	mouth	to	another,	provoked	by	the	resounding	and
vainglorious	firing	of	the	rifle.	I	couldn't	contain	my	anxiety.	I	decided	to	run
away	that	very	moment,	I	feared	the	night,	here,	in	this	country	manor,	its
subterranean	forces	unleashed	and	full	of	noxious	vapors.	Run!	Run	away	at
once!	But	Kneadus	wouldn't	go	without	Valek.	Therefore,	to	speed	things	up,	I
agreed	to	take	the	farmhand	with	us.	He	was	going	to	be	dismissed	anyway.	We
finally	decided	to	wait	until	everyone	in	the	house	was	asleep,	then	I	would	go	to
the	valet	and	persuade	him	to	run	away—order	him	if	need	be!	I	would	return
with	him	to	Kneadus,	and	then	the	three	of	us	would	decide	how	to	get	out	to	thefields.	The	dogs	knew	Valek.	We	would	spend	the	rest	of	the	night	in	a	field,
then	take	the	train	to	the	city.	To	the	city,	on	the	double!	To	the	city,	where	man
is	smaller,	better	settled	among	people,	and	more	like	other	people.	Minutes
dragged	into	eternity.	We	packed	our	belongings	and	counted	our	money,	and	we
wrapped	the	supper	we	had	hardly	touched	in	a	handkerchief.
After	midnight,	having	checked	through	our	window	that	all	the	rooms	were	in
darkness,	I	took	off	my	shoes	and	went	through	a	small	hallway,	barefoot—
making	sure	that	I	reached	the	pantry	as	quietly	as	possible.	When	Kneadus	shut
the	door	it	cut	off	any	remaining	light,	and	I	began	my	venture,	my	secretive
incursion	into	the	sleeping	house,	I	realized	how	mad	my	undertaking	was,	how
crazy	my	goal—penetrating	space	to	kidnap	some	farmhand.	Isn't	it	action	that,
in	the	final	analysis,	reveals	all	the	madness	of	madness?	I	advanced	step	by
step,	the	floor	creaked,	rats	gnawed	and	squealed	in	the	timbers	above	the
ceiling.	In	the	room	behind	me	was	Kneadus,	gone	rustic;	below	me	on	the	first
floor	were	my	uncle,	auntie,	Zygmunt,	and	Zosia,	to	whose	servant	I	was
proceeding	soundlessly	and	barefoot;	ahead	of	me	in	the	butler's	pantry	was	the
said	servant,	the	object	of	all	these	endeavors.	I	had	to	be	very	careful.	If
someone	were	to	spot	me	in	the	hallway,	in	the	darkness,	how	would	I	explain
the	meaning	of	this	escapade?	How	do	we	find	ourselves	on	these	tortuous	and
abnormal	roads?	Normality	is	a	tightrope walker	above	the	abyss	of	abnormality.
How	much	potential	madness	is	contained	in	the	everyday	order	of	things—you
never	know	when	and	how	the	course	of	events	will	lead	you	to	kidnap	a
farmhand	and	take	to	the	fields.	It's	Zosia	that	I	should	be	kidnapping.	If	anyone,
it	should	be	Zosia,	kidnapping	Zosia	from	a	country	manor	would	be	the	normal
and	correct	thing	to	do,	if	anyone	it	was	Zosia,	Zosia,	and	not	this	stupid,	idiotic
farmhand.	And	in	the	semi darkness	of	this	little	hallway	the	temptation	to
kidnap	Zosia	seized	me,	a	crystal clear	and	simple	kidnapping	of	Zosia,	oh	yes,
it	was	crystal clear—	kidnap	Zosia!
Hey,	to	kidnap	Zosia!	To	kidnap	Zosia	in	a	mature,	lordly	fashion,	just	as	had
been	done	many	times	of	yore.	I	had	to	fend	off	that	thought,	convince	myself
how	unsound	it	was—and	yet,	the	farther	I	fought	my	way	over	the	treacherous
floorboards	the	more	tempting	normality	seemed,	the	simple	and	natural
kidnapping	as	opposed	to	this	convoluted	kidnapping.	I	tripped	over	a	hole—
there	was	a	hole	under	my	toes,	a	hole	in	the	floor.	Why	was	the	hole	there?	It
seemed	familiar.	Hello,	hello—this	is	my	hole,	I	made	this	hole	years	ago!	My
uncle	had	given	me	a	little	hatchet	for	my	birthday,	and	it	was	with	this	hatchet
that	I	had	chopped	the	hole.	Auntie	had	rushed	in.	She	stood	right	here,	yelling	atme,	I	remembered	as	if	it	were	yesterday—	the	loose	fragments	of	her	scolding,
the	snatches	of	her	shouting—	and	I—hack!	I	hacked	her	leg	from	below	with
my	little	hatchet!	"Oh,	oh!"	she	screamed.	Her	scream	was	still	here—I	stood	as
if	the	scene	had	caught	me	by	the	leg,	the	scene	which	was	no	more,	and	yet	it
was	here,	at	this	very	spot.	I	had	hacked	her	in	the	leg.	I	now	clearly	saw	in	the
darkness	how	I	had	hacked	her,	God	knows	why,	in	spite	of	myself,
mechanically,	and	I	heard	her	screams.	She	screamed	and	jumped.	My	actions
now	were	mixing	and	intertwining	with	my	actions	of	the	past,	of	the	long gone
past,	and	suddenly	I	began	to	shiver,	my	jaws	clenched.	I	could	have	chopped	off
her	leg,	for	God's	sake,	had	I	swung	harder,	luckily	I	didn't	have	the	strength,	oh,
blessed	weakness.	But	now	I	did	have	the	strength.	Perhaps,	instead	of	going	to
the	farmhand,	I	should	go	to	auntie's	bedroom	and	hack	her	with	an	ax?	Begone,
begone	childishness.	Childishness?	But,	as	God	is	my	witness,	the	farmhand	was
also	childishness,	if	I	was	going	to	the	farmhand	I	could	equally	well	have	gone
and	hacked	auntie,	one	was	as	good	as	the	other—hack,	hack!	Oh,	childishness.	I
carefully	felt	the	floor	with	my	foot,	because	any	loud	creaking	could	have
betrayed	me,	and	I	thought	that	I	felt	the	floor	as	if	I	were	a	child,	as	if	I	now
walked	it	as	a	child.	Oh,	childishness.	The	childishness	latched	on	to	me	in	three
different	ways,	I	could	have	handled	one	way,	but	there	were	three.	The	first	was
the	childishness	of	the	pursuit	of	the	valet—the	farmhand.	The	second	was	the
childishness	of	what	I	had	lived	through	here,	years	ago.	The	third	was	the
childishness	of	lordliness,	because	now,	as	a	lord,	I	was	also	a	child.	Oh,	there
are	places	on	this	earth	and	in	life	that	are	more	childish	or	less	childish,	but	a
country	manor	is	probably	the	most	childish	place	of	all.	Here	the	lords	of	the
manor	and	the	peasantry	entrap	and	hold	onto	each	other	in	childishness,	here
everyone	is	a	child	to	everyone	else.	Walking	barefoot	farther	and	farther	and
concealed	by	blackness,	I	strode	as	if	into	a	lordly	past,	into	my	own	childhood,
while	a	sensuous,	carnal,	infantile,	and	unpredictable	world	was	enfolding	me,
pulling	on	me	and	sucking	me	in.	Blind	actions.	Automatic	reflexes.	Atavistic
instincts.	Lordly childish	fancy.	I	walked	as	if	into	the	anachronism	of	a	gigantic
slap	in	the	face,	which	was	simultaneously	a	tradition	of	many	centuries	and	an
infantile	smack,	and	it	liberated,	in	one	fell	swoop,	the	lord	and	the	child.
I	finally	touched	the	banister,	down	which	I	used	to	slide	in	yesteryear,
delighting	in	the	gravitational	downslide—from	the	top	to	the	very	bottom!	An
Infante,	
an	infant—a	king,	a	child,	a	lord child	full	speed	ahead,	oh,	if	only	I
were	to	hack	auntie	now,	she'd	never	get	up—and	I	was	terrified	of	my	own
strength,	of	my	claws	and	talons,	of	my	punches,	frightened	of	the	man	withinthe	child.	What	was	I	doing	here,	on	these	stairs,	why	and	where	was	I	going?
And	it	again	dawned	on	me	that	kidnapping	Zosia	was	the	only	acceptable
reason	for	this	foray,	the	only	manly	solution,	the	only	place	for	a	man	to	be	...
To	kidnap	Zosia!	Kidnap	Zosia	like	a	man!	I	kept	driving	the	thought	away	but	it
went	on	pestering	me	.	.	.	buzzing	within	me.
I	went	downstairs	and	stopped	in	a	hallway.	Dead	silence nothing	stirred
anywhere,	they	had	retired	at	the	usual	hour,	auntie	had	surely	ordered	everyone
to	bed	by	now,	and	tucked	them	into	their	comforters.	However,	their	rest	was
unlikely	a	rest,	under	their	comforters	everyone	wove	their	own	canvas	out	of
the	day's	events.	In	the	kitchen	it	was	also	quiet,	but	light	seeped	through	a	crack
in	the	pantry	door,	Valek	was	polishing	shoes,	and	I	saw	no	animation	on	his
mug,	it	was	its	usual	self.	I	slipped	in	slowly,	closed	the	door	behind	me,	placed
my	finger	on	my	lips	and,	with	extreme	caution,	whispering	into	his	ear,	I	began
my	exhortations.	He	was	to	pick	up	his	cap	right	now,	drop	everything	and	come
with	us,	we	were	going	to	Warsaw.	This	was	a	terrible	role	to	play,	I	would	have
preferred	anything	to	this	stupid	coaxing,	and	whispering	it	too.	Especially	since
he	put	up	a	resistance.	I	told	him	that	their	lordships	were	about	to	sack	him,	that
he'd	be	better	off	if	he	ran	away,	far,	far	away,	to	Warsaw,	with	Kneadus	who
would	pay	for	his	keep—but	he	didn't	understand,	he	couldn't	grasp	this.
"What's	this	runnin'	away	for,"	he	kept	saying	with	an	instinctual	mistrust	of	all
lordly	whims,	and	I	was	again	assailed	by	the	thought	that	Zosia	would	have
accepted	it	more	easily,	that	whispering	with	Zosia	in	the	middle	of	the	night
would	have	made	more	sense.	Time	was	running	short	for	more	lengthy
exhortations.	I	smacked	him	in	the	mug	and	gave	him	an	order,	he	then	obeyed
—but	I	smacked	him	through	a	dishrag.	Through	a	dishrag	I	smacked	him	in	the
mug,	I	had	to	place	a	dishrag	on	his	mug	and	smack	him	through	it	to	avoid
making	a	noise—oh,	oh!—in	the	dead	of	night	I	was	slapping	a	farmhand
through	a	dishrag.	He	obeyed,	though	the	dishrag	put	some	doubts	in	his	mind,
because	the	peasantry	does	not	like	deviations	from	the	norm.
"Come	on,	damn	it,"	I	ordered	him	and	went	out	into	the	hallway,	he	followed
me.	Where	were	the	stairs?	It	was	pitch	dark.
Down	the	hall	a	door	creaked	and	I	heard	my	uncle's	voice:
"Who's	there?"
I	quickly	caught	the	valet	by	the	arm	and	pushed	him	into	the	dining	room.	We
crouched	behind	the	door.	Konstanty	approached	slowly	and	entered	the	room,
he	walked	right	by	me."Who's	there?"	he	repeated,	quietly,	not	to	make	a	fool	of	himself	in	case	no	one
was	there.	Having	thrown	out	the	question	he	followed	it	deeper	into	the	interior
of	the	dining	room.	He	stopped.	He	had	no	matches,	and	the	darkness	was
impenetrable.	He	turned	around,	but	after	a	few	steps	he	stood	still—instantly
and	perfectly	still—did	he	sense,	in	the	darkness,	a	whiff	of	the	farmhand's
specific,	peasant	odor,	did	his	lordship's	delicate	skin	sense	the	paws	and	the
mug?	He	was	so	close	that	he	could	have	reached	us	with	his	hand,	yet	this	was
exactly	what	told	him	to	keep	his	hands	by	his	side,	he	was	too	close,	the
closeness	had	caught	him	in	its	trap.	He	didn't	move	and,	slowly	at	first,	then
more	and	more	quickly,	his	immobility	froze	into	a	state	of	alarm.	I	don't	think
he	was	a	coward,	although	people	said	he	clambered	up	the	gamekeeper	out	of
fear no,	the	reason	he	couldn't	move	was	not	that	he	was	afraid,	but	he	was
afraid	because	he	couldn't	move—once	he	put	on	the	brakes	and	stood	silent,
every	passing	second,	for	purely	logistic	reasons,	made	any	movement
increasingly	difficult.	Terror	had	been	locked	inside	him	for	a	long	time,	but	it
only	now	emerged	to	conspire	against	him,	and	his	lordship's	thin	little	bones
stuck	in	his	throat.	Not	a	peep	out	of	the	farmhand.	And	so	the	three	of	us	stood
just	a	few	feet	apart.	Our	skin	crawled,	our	hair	stood	on	end.	I	was	not	about	to
interrupt	this.	I	figured	that	he	would	finally	regain	control	and	leave,	thus
letting	us	leave	and	escape	upstairs	through	the	hallway,	but	it	didn't	occur	to	me
that	the	growing	fear	would	paralyze	him—	for	now	I	was	sure	that	an	inner
shift	and	reversal	had	taken	place,	he	was	no	longer	afraid	because	he	couldn't
move,	he	couldn't	move	because	he	was	afraid.	I	sensed	the	grave	terror	on	his
face,	concentration,	seriousness	beyond	belief.	.	.	and	I	in	turn	began	to	fear—
not	him,	but	his	fear.	If	we	were	to	retreat	or	make	the	slightest	move	he	could
have	pounced	on	us	and	grabbed	us.	If	he	had	the	pistol,	he	could	have	fired—
but	no,	we	were	too	close	for	him	to	shoot,	he	could	have	physically	but	not
mentally—because	one	needs	to	precede	a	shot	with	an	inner,	mental	shot,	and
there	wasn't	enough	distance	for	this.	But	he	could	have	pounced	on	us	and	used
his	hands.	He	didn't	know	what	lurked	in	front	of	him,	and	into	what	trouble	he'd
be	shoving	his	hands.	We	knew	his	form—he	didn't	know	ours.	I	wanted	to	come
out,	I	wanted	to	say	"uncle"	or	something	like	that.	But	after	so	many	seconds,	or
even	minutes,	I	couldn't,	it	was	too	late—because	how	was	I	to	explain	our
silence?	I	wanted	to	laugh,	as	if	someone	were	tickling	me.	Here	was
proliferation.	And	expansion.	Everything	was	expanding	in	blackness.	Inflating
and	widening,	yet	at	the	same	time	shrinking	and	straining,	evading	something,
and	some	kind	of	winnowing,	general	and	particular,	a	coagulating	tension	and	atensing	coagulation,	a	dangling	by	a	fine	thread,	as	well	as	transformation	into
something,	transmutation,	and	furthermore—a	falling	into	some	cumulative,
towering	system,	and	as	if	on	a	narrow	little	plank	raised	six	stories	up,	together
with	the	excitement	of	all	organs.	And	tickling.	We	heard	slippers	shuffling	in
the	hallway,	yet	we	felt	too	impotent	to	budge	and	so	we	did	not	budge.	It	was
Zygmunt	approaching	in	his	slippers.
"Is	anyone	here?"	he	asked	on	the	threshold.
He	took	another	step	and	repeated:	"Is	anyone	here?"	and	fell	silent,	he	froze,
sensing	something	was	afoot.	He	knew	that	his	father	was	somewhere	here,	since
he	must	have	heard	Konstanty's	footsteps	and	questions—so	why	didn't	his
father	say	something?	Archaic	fears	and	anxieties	had	corked	up	the	father,	ha,
ha,	ha,	and	so	he	couldn't,	he	couldn't	because	he	was	frightened!	And	the
father's	fear	corked	up	the	son.	All	the	fear	that	had	been	generated	thus	far
petrified	Zygmunt,	and	he	fell	silent,	as	if	forever.	Perhaps	at	first	he	felt	unclear,
but	soon	the	unclearness	clarified	itself	into	fear	and	grew	upon	itself.	
Da	capo—
winnowing,	distending,	magnifying,	raising	to	the	101st	power,	proliferating	and
stretching,	mollifying	and	caressing,	straining,	intently	listening	to	a	monotone,
piling	up	and	suspending—endlessly,	endlessly	going	up	and	under—all	the
while	Zygmunt	standing	a	few	steps	away.	Choking,	unable	to	swallow	and
damming	up,	holding	on	to	one's	head,	falling	and	breaking	apart,	prolonged
disentangling,	summing	up,	pushing	out	and	leading	up	to,	changing	and
intensifying,	intensifying	.	.	.	One	minute?	One	hour?	What	was	going	to
happen?	Universes	soared	through	my	brain.	I	recalled:	it	was	here,	long	ago,
that	I	lurked	to	scare	my	nanny—at	this	very	spot—and	I	almost	laughed.	Shush!
Why	laugh?	That's	enough,	cut	it	out,	stop	it,	what	will	happen	if	my
childishness	is	finally	disclosed,	what	if,	after	all	this	time,	they	discover	me
with	the	valet—it	would	be	strange,	and	inexplicable—but	oh,	with	Zosia,	to	be
with	Zosia,	to	hold	my	breath	with	Zosia	rather	than	with	the	farmhand!	With
Zosia	it	wouldn't	be	childish!	I	suddenly	took	a	bold	step,	I	slipped	behind	the
drapes,	quite	sure	that	the	other	men	wouldn't	dare	move.	Indeed,	they	didn't
dare.	In	the	darkness,	besides	fear,	there	was	now	an	awkwardness,	what's	more,
it	would	have	been	awkward	for	them	to	interrupt,	perhaps	they	intended	to,	they
thought	about	it,	but	they	didn't	know	how	to	do	it.	I'm	talking	here	about	their
silence.	For	I	interrupted	mine	by	moving.	It's	possible	that	they	thought	about
the	logistics,	they	looked	for	excuses	and	pretexts,	some	outer	justification,	and,
what's	worse,	each	one	of	them	hampered	the	other	by	his	presence,	and	both
those	thinkers	stood	there,	unable	to	stop,	to	cut	short,	while	the	pushing	out	anddisentangling	continued	unbroken.	Having	regained	my	ability	to	move	I
decided	to	catch	the	farmhand,	pull	him	along	and	make	a	quick	exit	into	the
hallway,	but	before	I	could	carry	out	my	decision—light,	light!—a	gleam	on	the
floor,	a	creaking	and	a	shuffling,	it	was	Francis,	Francis	had	arrived	with	a	light,
there	was	the	outline	of	my	uncle's	leg	coming	to	light,	into	light,	out	into	the
open!!	Fortunately	for	me,	I	was	behind	the	drapes!	But	their	old	servant	brought
to	light	everything	that	was	happening	in	the	dark!	And	they	all	stepped	out:	my
uncle,	Zygmunt,	the	valet—they	all	had	to	step	out!	My	uncle,	his	hair	roughed
up	a	bit,	only	a	step	from	the	valet,	both	facing	each	other—and	Zygmunt	stuck
farther	back	in	the	room,	like	a	post.
"Is	someone	walking	about?"	asked	the	butler	with	a	somewhat	plaintive	voice,
lighting	up	the	room	with	a	small	paraffin	lamp;	but	he	asked	this	after	the	fact,
merely	to	justify	his	arrival.	He	obviously	saw	them	as	if	on	the	palm	of	his
hand.
Konstanty	moved.	What	did	Francis	think,	seeing	him	close	to	the	valet?	Why
were	they	standing	next	to	each	other?	Konstanty	couldn't	step	back	right	away,
and	yet,	by	a	slight	movement,	he	widened	the	space	between	them;	he	took	a
step	to	one	side.
"What	are	you	doing	here?"	Konstanty	exclaimed,	transforming	his	fear	into
anger.
The	valet	didn't	answer.	He	couldn't	find	an	answer.	He	had	no	problem
standing,	but	he	couldn't	find	his	tongue.	He	was	alone	with	their	lordships.	The
silence	of	the	son	of	the	common	people	and	his	inability	to	explain	things	cast	a
shadow	of	suspicion.	Francis	looked	at	my	uncle—their	lordships	here	with
Valek	in	the	darkness?	Was	the	squire	also	hobnobbing	with	the	common
people?—the	old	servant	stood	erect,	lamp	in	hand,	slowly	turning	red	and
shining	like	the	sun's	afterglow	at	dusk.
"Valek!"	exclaimed	Zygmunt.
All	those	exclamations	were	ill timed,	they	came	either	too	soon	or	too	late,	and
I	crouched	behind	the	drapes.
"I	heard	someone	walking	about,"	Zygmunt	began,	confused	and	looking	right
and	left,	"I	heard	someone	walking.	Walking.	What	are	you	doing	here?	What
are	you	up	to?	Speak	up!	What	do	you	want	here?	Answer	me!!!	Answer	me,
damn	it!!!"	He	ranted	on	in	great	confusion.
"It's	obvious	what,"	answered	the	butler	after	a	long	and	deadly	silence,
inflamed,	"it's	obvious,	your	lordship."He	stroked	his	sideburns.
"The	table	silver	is	in	the	drawer.	And	tomorrow	your	lordships	were	going	to
release	him	from	his	duties.	So	he	figured	.	.	.	he'd	filch	it."
Filch	it!	Valek	had	wanted	to	steal	the	silver!	They	found	a	rationalization—he
wanted	to	steal,	and	they	caught	him	at	it.	Everyone,	Valek	included,	felt	better,
and,	behind	the	drapes,	I	too	breathed	more	easily.	Konstanty	moved	away	from
the	valet	and	sat	on	a	chair	by	the	table.	He	regained	his	customary	lordly
relationship	with	the	farmhand,	as	well	as	his	self assurance.	The	farmhand	had
wanted	to	steal!
"Come	here,"	said	Konstanty,	"come	here,	I	tell	you	.	.	.	Closer,	closer	.	.	."	He
was	no	longer	afraid	of	closeness	and	obviously	relished	the	fact	that	he	was	no
longer	afraid.	"Closer,"	he	repeated,	"closer,"	as	Valek	approached	him	with
mistrust,	dragging	his	feet,	"come	on,	closer,"	until	the	farmhand	almost	touched
him,	then	he	drew	back	his	fist	and,	still	sitting,	punched	him	in	the	snoot,	
Mane,
Tekel,	Fares!
{13}
	"I'll	teach	you	to	steal!"	Oh,	the	bliss	of	a	punch	by	the
lamplight,	after	all	the	fear	in	the	darkness,	oh,	to	punch	the	mug	that	scared	you,
to	punch	within	the	well defined	notion	of	thievery!	Oh,	the	bliss	of	a	normal
relation	after	so	many	abnormal	relations!	Zygmunt,	following	his	father's
example,	punched	Valek's	teeth	as	if	they	were	the	hanging	gardens	of
Semiramis!	He	punched	them	with	a	bang	and	a	whack!	Behind	the	drapes	I
tensely	coiled	myself	as	if	upon	a	spool.
"Ah	wasn't	stealin'!"	the	farmhand	said	catching	his	breath.
	That's	exactly	what	they	were	waiting	for.	It	enabled	them	to	exploit	the	excuse
of	thievery	to	its	limits.	"You	weren't	stealing?"	said	Konstanty,	and,	stretching
from	his	chair	he	again	smacked	him	in	the	snoot.	"You	weren't	stealing?"	said
the	young	lordship,	and,	as	he	stood	there,	he	too	hit	him	in	the	snoot	with	a
brisk	and	succinct	whack.	They	pounced	on	him.	"You	weren't	stealing?	You
weren't	stealing?"—and	asking	this	question	over	and	over	again,	unremittingly,
they	went	on	smacking	him,	searching	for	his	mug	with	their	hands	and,	having
found	it,	hitting	it	again,	briskly,	as	if	releasing	a	spring,	or	with	a	sweep	and	a
crash!	He	covered	himself	with	his	arms,	but	they	knew	how	to	get	at	him!	For	a
long	while	they	could	reach	only	his	mug,	but	I	felt	their	scope	would	widen;
indeed,	his	lordship	managed	to	break	the	barrier,	he	caught	Valek	by	the	hair
and,	having	caught	him	by	the	hair,	banged	his	noodle	on	the	counter	of	the
sideboard.
"I'll	teach	you	to	steal!	I'll	teach	you	to	steal!..."Ha,	and	so	it	began!	Oh,	accursed	billowing	night!	Accursed	darkness	that
magnified,	darkness	that	unleashed	all,	were	it	not	for	immersion	in	darkness	this
would	never	have	happened.	A	sediment	of	darkness	spread	over	it.	Kostie	the
squire	went	on	a	rampage.	Under	the	guise	of	thievery	he	gave	the	farmhand	a
thrashing:	for	the	fear,	for	the	terror,	for	the	blushing,	for	the	fra	.	.	.	ternizing
with	Kneadus,	for	everything	he	had	suffered.	"This	is	mine!	Mine!"	he	repeated,
hitting	him	against	drawers,	against	edges,	against	ornaments	and	moldings.	"It's
mine,	damn	you!"	And	the	"mine"	slowly	changed	its	meaning,	it	was	no	longer
clear	whether	he	meant	the	silver	and	the	flatware	or	his	own	body	and	soul,	his
hair,	his	customs,	his	hands,	his	lordliness,	his	refinement,	his	race	and	culture,
he	no	longer	banged	him	against	a	drawer,	he	banged	him	in	space,	without	any
pretexts!	It	seemed	that	by	thrashing	and	sacking	the	farmhand	he	was	enforcing
his	own	self,	not	the	silver	nor	his	estate,	but	himself.	It	was	his	own	self	that	he
was	enforcing!	What	terror!	Terror!	To	terrorize,	to	enforce	oneself	upon	the
farmhand	lest	he	dare	fra	.	.	.	ternize	again,	no	more	prattlin'	or	marvelin',	the
valet	must	accept	their	lordships	as	the	godhead!	With	his	lordly,	dainty	little
hand	the	squire	was	pounding	his	own	being	into	that	snoot!	That's	how	a	turkey
would	pound	a	turkey	into	a	sparrow!	A	foxterrier	pound	the	cult	of	a	foxterrier
into	a	mongrel!	An	owl—into	a	jay!	A	buffalo—into	a	dog!	I	rubbed	my	eyes
behind	the	drapes,	I	wanted	to	scream,	cry	for	help,	but	I	couldn't.	Francis,
meanwhile,	lit	everything	from	the	side	with	his	small	paraffin	lamp.	Auntie!
Auntie!	Did	my	eyes	mislead	me,	or	did	I	see	auntie	standing	in	the	door	of	the
smoking	room,	candy	in	hand.	Hope	swept	through	me,	I	thought	my	aunt	might
save	the	situation,	smooth	things	over—neutralize	them.	But	no!	She	lifted	her
arms	as	if	to	scream,	but	instead	of	screaming	she	smiled	without	rhyme	or
reason,	she	waved	it	all	aside,	made	a	nondescript	gesture	or	two,	and	retreated
into	the	smoking	room.	She	pretended	not	to	be	there,	she	didn't	take	in	what	she
had	seen,	didn't	assimilate	it,	the	dose	was	too	potent—and	she	vanished	into
herself	and	into	the	interior	of	the	room,	or	rather,	she	flowed	back	so	mistily
that	I	doubted	whether	she	had	ever	been	there.	Konstanty's	energy	would	leave
him	momentarily—then	he	would	resume	enforcing—while	Zygmunt	kept
jumping	in	from	the	side,	also	enforcing	himself	on	the	farmhand,	enforcing	and
enforcing,	limited	only	by	the	reach	of	his	arm.	When	my	uncle	let	up,	Zygmunt
let	the	farmhand	have	it,	and	he	enforced	himself	with	all	his	power,	roar	and
uproar!	And	through	their	clenched	jaws	they	let	fly	breathless	words	such	as:
"So	I	climbed	up	the	gamekeeper!	On	the	gamekeeper	I	climbed!	And	you,	you,
you	fancy	fra...	ternizing!""So	I	love	the	oldie,	do	I?!"
And	they	beat	him,	once	and	for	all	driving	it	into	him	and	enforcing	it.	They
enforced	it	while	following	all	the	rules,	never	hitting	his	legs	nor	his	back,	it
was	always	his	mug	that	they	bashed,	smashed,	beat	with	their	hands!	They
weren't	fighting	with	him—	they	weren't	fighting	him—it	was	only	his	mug	they
hit!	And	this	they	were	permitted	to	do.	It	was	their	age old,	officially	sanctioned
right.	While	old	Francis	went	on	shining	his	light	and,	when	their	hands	grew
weak,	tactfully	suggesting:
"Your	honorable	lordhips	will	teach	him	not	to	steal!	Your	honorable	lordships
will	teach	him	a	lesson!"
They	finally	stopped.	They	sat	down.	The	farmhand	was	catching	his	breath,
blood	oozed	from	his	ear,	his	head	and	his	mug	were	beaten	to	a	pulp.	They
offered	each	other	cigarettes,	the	old	butler	jumped	to	with	a	match.	They	were
through,	it	seemed.	But	Zygmunt	let	out	a	circle	of	smoke.
"Give	us	the	
starka,"	
he	exclaimed,	"serve	up	the	oldie!"
{14}
Have	they	gone	mad?	How	was	he	supposed	to	serve	up	the	oldie?	The
farmhand	blinked	with	his	bloodied	eyes.
"But	she's	in	the	village,	your	lo'dship!"
I	wiped	my	brow.	They	didn't	mean	the	peasant,	the	shy	old	Josie,	but	the	old,
mature,	delicious,	and	lordly	rye	vodka	
oldie,	
which	was	right	there	in	the
pantry,	in	a	bottle!	And	when	the	valet	finally	understood	and	sprang	to	the
cupboard,	took	out	the	bottle	and	the	glasses	and	filled	them,	Zygmunt	and	his
father	clinked	their	shot	glasses	and	each	downed	a	shot	of	the	noble,	dry	vodka.
Then	another!	Then	a	third	and	a	fourth!
"We'll	teach	him	a	lesson!	We'll	drill	him	all	right!"
And	it	all	began	again,	all	over	again...	until	I	wondered	whether	my	senses	were
misleading	me.	For	nothing	misleads	us	as	much	as	our	senses.	Could	this	be
real?	Hidden	behind	the	drapes,	barefoot,	I	wasn't	sure	whether	I	was	looking	at
the	truth	or	the	continuation	of	darkness—I	was	barefoot,	can	one	see	the	truth,
barefoot?	Take	off	your	shoes,	hide	behind	drapes,	and	look!	Look,	while
barefoot!	What	grotesque	kitsch!	Drinking	up	one	glass	after	another	of	the
mature,	dry	
oldie,	
they	began	to	train	the	farmhand	to	become	a	mature	lackey.
"Fetch	me	this,	fetch	me	that!"	they	shouted.	"Glasses!
Napkins!	Bread	and	rolls!	Appetizers!	Ham!	Set	the	table!	Wait	on	us!"	The
farmhand	scurried	and	ran	around	like	a	top.	And	they	ate	in	front	of	him	and
relished	their	food,	they	drank	and	feasted—they	forced	down	the	food,	theyforced	down	the	lordly	spread.	"Their	lo'dships	are	drinkin'!"	exclaimed
Konstanty	downing	a	glass	of	the	
oldie.	
"Their	lo'dships	are	eatin'!"	seconded
Zygmunt.	"Ah'm	eatin'	what's	moin!	Ah'm	drinkin	what's	moin!	It's	moin	what
ah'm	drinkin'!	It's	moin	what	ah'm	eatin'!	Moin,	not	yaus!	Moin!	Know	who's	the
boss	here!"	they	shouted,	and,	pushing	their	persons	right	under	his	nose	they
enforced	themselves	with	all	their	characteristics,	so	that	he	wouldn't	dare
criticize,	nor	question,	to	the	end	of	his	days,	nor	marvel,	nor	scoff,	nor	sneer,	so
that	he'd	accept	the	whole	thing	in	and	of	itself.	
Ding	an	sich!	
And	they	shouted:
"What	the	lord	sayeth,	the	servant	obeyeth!"	and	they	spat	out	commands,	there
was	no	end	to	the	commands,	and	the	farmhand	went	on	and	on,	carrying	them
out!	"Kiss	my	leg!"	he	kissed.	"Make	your	bows!	On	your	knees!"	he	fell	to	his
knees,	while	Francis,	as	if	with	a	trumpet,	marked	the	beat:
"Your	honorable	lordships	are	drilling	him!	Your	honorable	lordships	are
teaching	him!"
They	drilled	him!	By	the	light	of	a	small	paraffin	lamp,	at	the	table	stained	with
oldie!	
All	above	board,	because	they	were	training	a	peasant	farmhand	to	be	a
lackey.	I	wanted	to	exclaim:	"that's	enough,	enough,"	but	I	couldn't.	I	was
ashamed	to	let	on	that	I	saw	it	all.	I	wasn't	even	sure	it	was	as	I	saw	it,	or
whether	I	was	imagining	it,	how	much	of	this	kitsch	was	my	own	ugly	creation
unfolding	before	me,	perhaps	if	I	had	my	shoes	on	I	wouldn't	have	seen	it	at	all.
And	I	was	scared	that	the	gaze	of	yet	some	other	person	might	encompass	me	in
this	scene,	and	as	part	of	the	scene.	I	shrank	under	the	blows	that	fell	on	the
farmhand's	mug,	I	choked	with	dread	and	despair,	yet	I	wanted	to	laugh,	and	I
laughed	in	spite	of	myself	like	someone	whose	foot	is	being	tickled,	oh,	Zosia,	if
only	Zosia	were	here,	to	kidnap	Zosia,	to	run	away	with	Zosia	like	an	adult	man!
In	the	meantime	they	went	on	drilling,	drilling	the	immature	boy,	in	a	mature	and
lordly	fashion,	with	elegance,	even	with	wit,	with	pizzazz,	sitting	by	the	table,
sprawled	over	the	chairs	and	sipping	the	dry	
oldie.
Kneadus	appeared	at	the	door!
"Let'm	go!	Let'm	go!"
It	wasn't	a	scream.	It	was	a	throaty	squeak.	He	went	for	my	uncle!	I	suddenly
saw	that	everything	was	in	full	view!	Out	there!	There	was	a	crowd	outside	the
window.	Farmhands,	wenches,	grooms,	men	and	womenfolk,	housekeepers,
estate	servants,	house	servants—everyone	was	looking	in!	The	curtains	hadn't
been	drawn.	The	uproar	in	the	dead	of	night	had	called	them	here!	They
hadwatched	with	respect	the	way	their	lordships	were	drivin'	Valek—how	theywere	teachin',	drillin',	and	trainin'	him	to	be	a	lackey.
"Watch	out,	Kneadus!"	I	shouted.	Too	late.	Konstanty	found	time	to	turn	away
from	Kneadus	in	disdain	and	once	again	smack	the	valet	in	the	snoot.	Kneadus
sprang	forward	and	caught	the	farmhand	in	his	arms,	hugging	him.
"He's	moin!	Ah	won't	let	ya!	Let'm	go!"	he	squealed,	"let'm	go!	Ah	won't	let	ya!"
"You	sniveling	brat!"	Konstanty	shrieked,	"I'll	spank	you!	I'll	spank	your	pupa!
You'll	get	it	in	the	pupa,	you	sniveling	brat!"	He	and	Zygmunt	pounced	on	him.
When	they	heard	Kneadus'	boyish	squealing	their	lordships	went	berserk.	To
trivialize	him	through	the	pupa!	To	deprive	fra...	ternization	of	all	meaning,	to
spank	his	pupa	in	front	of	Valek	and	in	front	of	all	the	rabble	outside	the
window!
"Ee ho,	ee ho	ee ho!"	squeaked	Kneadus,	cowering	awkwardly.	He	then	leapt
behind	the	farmhand.	And	the	latter,	as	if	fraternizing	with	Kneadus	had	restored
his	daring	and	arrogance	toward	their	lordships,	abandoned	all	formality	and
smashed	Konstanty	in	the	snoot.
"What	are	ya	buttin'	in	for?"	he	exclaimed	rudely.
The	mystic	clasp	broke!	The	servant's	hand	fell	on	the	lordly	countenance.
Crash,	bang,	and	stars	in	front	of	Konstanty's	eyes.	He	was	unprepared	for	this
and	went	sprawling.	Immaturity	spilled	everywhere.	Crash	of	a	broken	window.
Darkness.	A	well aimed	rock	broke	the	lamp.	Windows	let	go—the	peasants	had
forced	them	open	and	slowly	began	crawling	in,	in	the	darkness	the	place
became	thick	with	peasant	body	parts.	The	air	was	stifling,	as	in	an	unventilated
manager's	office.	Hands	and	feet—no,	the	rabble	doesn't	have	feet paws,	a	huge
number	of	paws,	all	solid	and	heavy.	The	peasants,	encouraged	by	the	unique
immaturity	of	the	whole	scene,	lost	all	respect	and	manifested	a	desire	to	fra	.	.	.
ternize.	I	heard	Zygmunt	squeak,	my	uncle	squeaked—I	think	the	peasants
somehow	dragged	them	into	their	midst	and	began	to	take	them	in	hand,	rather
slowly	and	clumsily,	but	I	didn't	see	it	because	it	was	dark...	I	jumped	out	from
behind	the	drapes.	Auntie!	Auntie!	I	suddenly	remembered	auntie.	I	run	barefoot
to	the	smoking	room,	grab	auntie,	who	lay	on	the	sofa	playing	possum,	and	I	pull
her	heave ho,	push	her	into	the	heap,	to	mix	her	in	with	the	heap.
"My	child,	what	are	you	doing,	child?"	she	pleaded	and	kicked,	and	offered	me
candy,	but	I,	just	like	a	child,	pull	and	pull,	pull	her	into	the	heap,	push	her	into
it,	they've	got	her,	they're	holding	on	to	her!	My	aunt	is	in	the	heap!	She's	in	the
heap!	I	dashed	through	the	rooms.	Not	to	flee—but	just	to	run,	to	run,	nothing
but	run	full	speed	ahead,	run,	egging	myself	on	and	stomping	my	bare	footsies!	Idashed	onto	the	porch!	The	moon	sailed	from	behind	the	clouds,	yet	it	was	not
the	moon,	it	was	the	pupa.	A	pupa	of	tremendous	size	atop	the	trees.	A	child's
pupa	atop	the	world.	And	the	pupa.	Nothing	but	the	pupa.	Over	there	they	are
tumbling	in	a	heap,	and	here	it's	the	pupa.	Little	leaves	on	the	bushes	are
trembling	in	a	light	breeze.	And	here	it's	the	pupa.
Deadly	despair	caught	me	in	its	grip.	I	was	totally	infantilized.	Run,	but	where?
Back	to	the	manor?	There	was	nothing	there—just	slapping,	smacking,	and
tumbling	in	a	heap.	Where	do	I	turn,	what	do	I	do,	where	am	I	in	this	world?
Where	do	I	put	myself?	I	was	all	alone,	even	worse	than	alone,	because	I	had
become	like	a	child.	I	couldn't	be	alone	for	long,	not	connected	to	anything.	I	ran
down	the	road	jumping	over	dry	sticks	like	a	grasshopper.	I	was	seeking	a
connection	with	something,	a	new	if	temporary	order,	so	that	I	wouldn't	stick	out
in	space	any	longer.	A	shadow	broke	away	from	a	tree.	Zosia!	She	grabbed	me!
"What	happened	down	there?"	she	asked.	"Have	the	peasants	attacked	my
father?"
I	grabbed	her.
"Let's	run	away!"	I	said.
Together	we	ran	through	fields	and	meadows	into	an	unknown	expanse,	and	she
was	as	if	the	kidnapped,	and	I	as	if	the	kidnapper.	We	ran	down	a	path	across	the
fields	until	we	were	out	of	breath.	We	spent	the	rest	of	the	night	in	a	tiny
meadow	by	a	pond's	edge,	buried	in	bulrushes,	shivering	with	cold,	our	teeth
chattering.	Grasshoppers	shrilled.	At	dawn	another	pupa,	red,	and	a	hundredfold
more	magnificent,	made	its	appearance	on	the	horizon	and	filled	the	world	with
its	rays,	causing	all	objects	to	cast	elongated	shadows.
We	didn't	know	what	to	do.	I	could	neither	explain	nor	express	in	any	way	what
had	happened	at	the	manor	because	I	was	ashamed,	I	couldn't	find	the	right
words.	She	probably	guessed	more	or	less	what	had	happened,	because	she	too
was	ashamed	and	couldn't	express	it	either.	She	sat	among	the	reeds	by	the
water,	coughing	a	little	because	of	the	damp	air	that	was	coming	from	the	rushes.
I	counted	my	money—I	had	about	fifty	zlotys	and	some	small	change.
Theoretically	speaking,	we	could	have	walked	on	foot	to	one	of	the	nearby
estates	and	asked	for	help.	Yet	how	were	we	to	present	the	whole	situation,	put	it
into	words	for	the	people	at	the	estate,	I	would	have	been	too	ashamed	to	speak,
I	would	rather	have	spent	the	rest	of	my	life	in	the	bulrushes	than	to	speak	of	it.
Never!	It	was	better	to	assume	that	I	had	kidnapped	her,	that	we	were	running
away	from	her	parents'	home,	this	would	have	been	much	more	mature easier	toaccept.	Going	on	with	this	line	of	reasoning,	I	wouldn't	have	had	to	clarify	or
explain	anything	to	Zosia,	because	a	woman	will	always	accept	that	she's	being
loved.	Under	this	pretext	we	could	slip	away	to	the	railroad	station,	take	a	train
to	Warsaw,	and	begin	a	new	life	in	secrecy	from	everyone—and	the	kidnapping
would	have	justified	such	secrecy.
So	I	pressed	a	kiss	on	both	her	cheeks,	and	I	confessed	my	passion	for	her,	I
began	to	apologize	that	I	had	kidnapped	her,	and	to	explain	that	her	family
would	never	have	consented	to	a	union	with	me	because	my	financial	situation
wasn't	good	enough,	I	told	her	I	had	fallen	in	love	with	her	at	first	sight,	and	that
I	had	sensed	immediately	that	she	felt	the	same	for	me.
"There	was	no	other	way	than	to	kidnap	you,	Zosia,"	I	said,	"and	for	us	to	run
away	together."
She	was	a	little	surprised	at	first,	but,	after	I	had	been	proposing	to	her	for	a
quarter	of	an	hour,	she	began	to	make	little	faces,	look	coyly	at	me	because	I
looked	coyly	at	her,	and	twirl	her	fingers.	She	forgot	all	about	the	peasants	and
the	anarchy	at	the	estate,	and	she	soon	believed	that	I	had	kidnapped	her.	This
flattered	her	enormously	because,	until	now,	she	had	only	done	needlework,
studied,	or	sat	and	gawked,	or	spent	time	being	bored,	or	taken	walks,	or	looked
out	the	window,	or	played	the	piano,	or	done	charitable	work	at	
United	Front,	
or
taken	exams	in	vegetable	cultivation,	or	flirted	and	danced	while	music	played,
or	gone	to	spas,	or	conversed	and	looked	through	windowpanes	into	the	far
yonder.	Not	until	now	did	she	entertain	any	hope	that	someone	would	turn	up
who	would	possess	her.	And	now,	there	was	someone	like	that,	someone	who
had	actually	kidnapped	her!	So	she	mustered	all	her	talents	for	love,	and	she	fell
in	love	with	me—because	I	had	fallen	in	love	with	her.
In	the	meantime	the	pupa	rose	and	fired	a	billion	glistening	rays	over	a	world
that	was	only	a	substitute	world,	made	of	cardboard,	touched	up	in	green,	lit
from	above	with	a	burning	glare.	Avoiding	human	settlements,	we	slipped	along
out of the way	paths	toward	the	railroad	station,	and	it	was	a	long	way—about
fifteen	miles.	She	walked	and	I	walked,	I	walked	and	she	walked,	and	together
we	kept	on	walking	under	the	rays	of	the	merciless,	brilliant,	blazing,	infantile,
and	infantilizing	pupa.	Grasshoppers	hopped.	Crickets	buzzed	in	the	grass.
Birdies	sat	on	trees	or	flew	about.	At	the	sight	of	any	human	being	we	would
make	a	detour	or	hide	in	the	bushes	by	the	road.	Zosia,	however,	assured	me	that
she	knew	the	way,	because	she	had	gone	this	way	a	thousand	times	before,	either
by	carriage	or	cabriolet,	or	by	buggy	or	on	sleds.	The	heat	was	getting	to	us.
Fortunately,	we	were	able	to	refresh	ourselves	with	milk,	secretly	sucking	dry	acow	that	was	standing	by	the	roadside.	And	we	walked	again.	All	this	time,
because	of	my	declaration	of	love,	I	had	to	keep	talking	love	and	to	show
consideration,	for	example,	by	helping	her	to	negotiate	planks	tossed	across
streams,	chasing	away	flies,	inquiring	whether	she	was	tired—and	many	such
considerations	and	favors.	She	in	turn	did	likewise:	she	inquired,	chased	away
flies,	and	showed	consideration.	I	was	terribly	tired,	oh,	just	to	reach	Warsaw,	to
be	free	of	her,	to	begin	living	again.	I	wanted	to	use	her	merely	as	a	pretext	and	a
guise	under	which	I	could	get	away	from	that	heap	at	the	estate	with	some
semblance	of	maturity,	and	to	arrive	in	Warsaw	where	I	could,	after	a	while,	set
myself	up.	But	in	the	meantime	I	had	to	show	interest	in	her	and	generally	carry
on	an	intimate	conversation	with	her	like	two	people	who	delight	in	each	other,
and	Zosia,	as	mentioned	above,	touched	by	my	emotion,	became	more	and	more
proactive	herself.	And	the	pupa,	incredibly	scorching	and	towering	at	the	altitude
of	a	billion	cubic	miles,	ravaged	the	valleys	of	this	world.	She	was	a	young	lady
from	the	country,	raised	by	her	mother	and	my	aunt,	Mrs.	Hurlecka,	née	Lin,	and
by	servants—thus	far	she	had	dabbled	in	self education	and	studied	at	the
College	of	Gardening	and	taken	courses	at	the	School	of	Business,	or	dabbled	in
making	jams,	or	dabbled	at	skinning	currants	for	preserves,	or	developed	her
heart	and	mind,	or	sat	around	a	bit,	also	worked	as	office	help,	or	played	the
piano	just	a	tad,	or	walked	around	a	little	and	said	something,	but	most	of	all	she
waited	and	waited,	she	waited	for	the	one	who	would	come,	fall	in	love	with	her,
and	kidnap	her.	She	was	a	great	expert	at	waiting,	she	was	gentle,	passive,	timid,
and	that	s	why	she	suffered	from	bad	teeth,	for	she	was	exceptionally	well suited
to	a	dentist's	waiting	room,	and	her	teeth	knew	it.	And	now,	when	the	long 
awaited	man	appeared	on	the	scene	and	kidnapped	her,	when	that	festive	day
finally	dawned,	she	began	to	work	at	it	intensely,	to	show	off	and	display,	to
bring	to	light	all	her	trump	cards	and	exhibit	them,	pulling	little	faces,	smiling,
jumping	up	and	down,	rolling	her	eyes,	laughing	with	her	teeth	and	with	the	joy
of	life,	gesticulating	or	humming	melodies	under	her	breath	to	display	her
musical	sophistication	(because	she	played	the	piano	a	little	and	could	render	the
Moonlight	Sonata).	Moreover,	she	brought	forward	and	displayed	body	parts	that
were	attractive,	hiding	those	that	were	not.	And	I	had	to	look	and	gaze	and
pretend	that	I	was	taken	by	it,	and	take	it	all	in	...	All	the	while	the	fiery	and
exalted	pupa	dominated	the	world	from	the	boundless	blue	skies,	glorying,
shining,	glistening,	baking	and	burning,	drying	up	the	herbs	and	grasses.	Since
Zosia	knew	that	one	is	happy	when	in	love,	she	was	happy—and	she	gazed	with
a	bright,	luminous	gaze,	and	I	too	had	to	gaze.	And	she	whispered:"I	so	wish	that	all	people	could	be	as	content	and	happy	as	we	are—and	if	they're
good,	they	will	be	happy."
Or	else:
"We're	young,	we	love	each	other...	the	world	belongs	to	us!"	and	she	would
snuggle	up	to	me,	so	I	had	to	snuggle	up	to	her.
Since	she	was	convinced	that	I	loved	her,	she	opened	up	and	began	to	confide	in
me,	and	talk	sincerely	and	intimately	as	she	had	never	done	before.	Until	now
she	was	frightened	of	people	because	she	had	been	brought	up	by	aunt	Hurlecka,
née	Lin	(now	totally	lost	in	that	heap),	and	by	servants	in	aristocratic	isolation,
she	had	never	confided	in	anyone	for	fear	of	being	criticized	or	found	wanting,
she	was	somehow	left	incomplete,	ill defined,	unresolved,	lacking	inner	checks
and	balances	and	therefore	unsure	of	the	impression	she	was	creating.	She	badly
needed	kindness,	she	couldn't	live	without	it,	she	could	only	talk	to	someone
who'd	be	in	advance,	
a	priori,	
kindly	and	warmly	disposed	toward	her	...	And
now,	realizing	that	I	loved	her,	and	thinking	that	she	had	acquired	a	warm,	an
unquestioning	admirer	who	would	
a	priori	
accept	with	love	anything	she	said
because	he	loved	her,	she	began	to	confide	and	unbosom	herself,	she	told	me	of
her	joys	and	sorrows,	of	her	tastes	and	fancies,	her	enthusiasms,	illusions,	and
disappointments,	her	transports	of	joy,	her	emotions,	memories,	and	all	those
little	details—ha,	she	finally	found	someone	who	loved	her,	to	whom	she	could
unbosom	herself	with	impunity,	assured	that	everything	would	be	accepted,
without	reprisal,	and	with	love,	warmly...	And	I	had	to	accede	and	accept,	to
admire	it	all	.	.	.
And	she	said:	"Man	must	have	a	well rounded	education,	he	must	perfect
himself	in	body	and	soul,	a	human	being	must	always	be	beautiful!	I'm	for	the
fullness	of	humanity.	Sometimes	of	an	evening	I	love	to	rest	my	brow	against	a
windowpane	and	close	my	eyes,	I	can	relax	then.	I	like	movies,	but	I	love
music."	And	I	had	to	say	"yes	...	yes."	And	she	chirped	that	on	awakening	in	the
morning	she	must	rub	her	little	nose,	feeling	sure	that	I	could	not	be	indifferent
to	her	little	nose,	and	she	would	burst	out	laughing,	and	I	too	would	burst	out.
And	then	she	would	sadly	say:	"I	know	I'm	stupid.	I	know	I	don't	know	how	to
do	much.	I	know	I'm	not	pretty..."	And	I	had	to	say	"oh,	no,	no."	She	knew	that	I
was	gainsaying	her	not	in	the	name	of	truth	and	reality	but	only	because	I	was	in
love	with	her,	and	she	therefore	accepted	these	negations	with	pleasure,
delighted	that	she	had	found	an	unquestioning	admirer	
a	priori,	
who	loved,	who
agreed,	who	took	and	accepted	everything,	everything,	kindhear tedly,	warmly...Oh,	what	torture	I	had	to	endure	to	save	this	pretense	of	maturity,	here,	along
those	country	paths	leading	through	stubble	fields,	while	yonder,	peasants	and
lordships	were	tumbling	and	kneading	one	another	without	shame,	and,	from
above,	the	pupa,	suspended	at	its	zenith,	was	horribly,	mercilessly	flinging	its
shafts	of	light,	its	billion	arrows—oh,	the	warm	kindness,	the	deadly,	restrictive
tenderness,	the	mutual	admiration	and	affection	...	Oh,	the	gall	these	cute	little
women	have,	so	greedy	for	love,	so	eager	to	team	up	in	loving,	so	keen	to
become	the	object	of	admiration...	How	dare	she,	a	mushy,	wishy washy	nobody,
acquiesce	to	my	fervor	and	accept	my	worship,	greedily	and	avariciously	filling
her	appetite	with	my	adulation?	Is	there	anything	on	this	earth	and	under	the
blazing,	scorching	pupa	more	terrible	than	that	cloying,	womanly	warmth,	that
shy,	intimate	idolizing	and	snuggling?	.	.	.	And	what's	worse,	in	order	to	recipro 
cate	and	fulfill	this	mutual	admiration	scheme,	she	proceeded	to	admire	me—
and,	with	due	attention	and	interest,	she	proceeded	to	ask	me	about	myself—not
because	she	was	truly	interested	but	to	return	the	favor—for	she	knew	that	if	she
showed	interest	in	me	I	would	be	all	the	more	interested	in	her.	I	was	thus	forced
to	tell	her	about	myself	while	she	listened,	her	little	head	resting	on	my	shoulder,
interjecting	questions	from	time	to	time	to	let	me	know	that	she	was	listening.
And	she	in	turn	fed	me	with	her	admiration,	snuggling	up	to	me,	enamored	of
me,	told	me	that	she	liked	me	oh	so	much,	that	from	the	word	go	I	had	made
such	an	impression	on	her,	that	she	loved	me	more	and	more,	that	I	was	so	bold,
so	courageous	...
"You	have	kidnapped	me,"	she	kept	saying,	intoxicated	by	her	own	words,	"not
everyone	would	have	dared.	You	fell	in	love	and	you	kidnapped	me,	asking	no
questions,	you	simply	kidnapped	me,	you	weren't	afraid	of	my	parents	...	I	love
those	eyes	of	yours,	bold,	fearless,	rapacious."
And	her	admiration	made	me	squirm	as	if	the	devil	himself	were	flogging	me,
and	the	huge,	infernal	pupa	exulted	in	its	glory	and	pierced	from	above	like	the
universe's	ultimate	portent,	like	the	key	to	all	riddles	and	the	final	denominator
of	all	things.	While	Zosia,	snuggling	up	to	me,	worked	on	me,	and	warmly,
timidly,	awkwardly,	she	mythologized	me	just	as	she	chose,	and	I	sensed	that	in
her	clumsy	way	she	adored	my	attributes	and	virtues,	she	searched	for	them,	all
the	while	kindling	the	flames	and	warming	up	to	me	...	She	took	my	hand	and
nestled	it	in	hers,	so	I	nestled	hers	in	mine—while	the	infantile,	infernal	pupa
reached	its	zenith,	its	culmination,	and	scorched	us	directly	from	above.
Suspended	at	the	very	summit	of	space,	it	shot	its	golden,	glistening	rays	on	this
vale	of	tears	and	between	all	possible	horizons.	All	the	while	Zosia	snuggledever	closer,	bonded	with	me	more	and	more,	she	led	me	into	her.	I	was	sleepy.	I
couldn't	walk	any	more,	nor	listen	to	her,	nor	respond,	and	yet	I	had	to	keep
walking,	listening	and	responding.	We	crossed	meadows,	and	those	meadows	of
greenish green	and	greening	grass	were	full	of	yellow	buttercups,	but	the
buttercups	were	timid,	nestled	in	the	grass,	the	grass	was	a	bit	slippery,	wet	on
the	surface	and	a	little	damp	below,	steaming	under	the	relentless	heat	from
above.	Snowdrops	in	great	numbers	appeared	on	either	side	of	the	path,	but	they
were	slightly	yellowish,	like	weak	tea,	and	anemic looking.	There	were	lots	of
anemones	on	the	slopes	and	melons	galore.	On	the	waters,	in	damp	ditches	water
lilies—pale,	wan,	delicate,	whitish—stagnated	in	the	scorching,	sweltering	heat.
While	Zosia	went	on	cuddling	and	confiding.	And	the	pupa	went	on	hitting	the
earth.	Dwarf	trees,	their	core	sickly,	puffy,	almost	like	a	puffball,	were	so
frightened	that	as	soon	as	I	touched	one	it	fell	apart.	Little	sparrows	chirped	in
great	numbers.	High	above	were	little	clouds,	whitish,	pinkish,	and	bluish,	as	if
made	of	muslin,	wretched looking	and	mawkish.	No	clear	outline	anywhere,
everything	smeared,	silent	and	mortified,	waiting	in	concealment,	unborn	and	so
undefined	that	nothing	was	separate	or	distinct,	everything	united	with
everything	else	into	a	swampy,	whitish,	faded,	quiet	pulp.	Frail	little	streams
murmured,	spilled	over,	seeped	into	the	soil	and	then	steamed,	or	bubbled	here
and	there,	creating	bleb	and	snot.	The	world	was	becoming	smaller,	constricting
itself,	shrinking	and,	while	shrinking,	it	strained	and	pressed,	it	tightened	round
one's	neck	like	a	softly	choking	dog	collar.	All	the	while	the	utterly	infantile
pupa	struck	and	terrified	one	from	on	high.	I	rubbed	my	forehead.
"What	kind	of	a	place	is	this?
She	turned	her	poor	tired	and	frail	face	toward	me	and	said	bashfully	and
tenderly,	snuggling	warmly	into	my	shoulder:
"This	is	my	place."
Something	caught	me	by	the	throat.	This	is	where	she	brought	me.	Yes,	so	all
this	was	hers	...	But	I	felt	sleepy,	my	head	hung	low,	I	had	no	energy—oh,	to
break	loose,	move	away	at	least	a	step,	push	away	to	an	arm's	length,	hit	her	with
fury,	say	something	unkind,	shatter	her—be	bad,	oh,	to	be	unkind	to	Zosia!	Oh,
to	be	unkind	to	Zosia!	"I	must,	I	must,"	I	thought	sleepily,	my	head	fallen	on	my
breast,	"I	must	be	unkind	to	Zosia!"	Oh,	cruelty—cold	as	ice,	life saving,	life 
giving	unfriendliness!	It's	high	time	to	be	unkind.	I	have	to	be	unkind	.	.	.	But
how	can	I	be	unkind	while	I'm	kind—while	she's	charming	me,	suffusing	me
with	her	kindness	and	I'm	suffusing	her	with	mine,	while	she's	snuggling	up	to
me	and	I'm	snuggling	up	to	her	...	no	help	from	anywhere!	In	these	fields	andmeadows,	among	timid	grasses	just	the	two	of	us—she	with	me	and	I	with	her—
and	nowhere,	nowhere	anyone	to	save	us.	I'm	alone	here	with	Zosia,	and	with
the	pupa	as	it	lies	dead	in	the	firmament	in	its	absolute	continuance,	brilliant	and
blazing,	infantile	and	infantilizing,	closed,	sunken,	magnified	within	itself	and
standing	still	at	the	apogee	of	its	zenith...
Oh,	for	a	third	person!	Help,	rescue	us!	Oh,	may	a	third	human	being	come	to
the	two	of	us,	oh,	salvation,	come	and	let	me	latch	on	to	you,	save	us!	Let	athird
human	being	come	now,	forthwith,	a	stranger,	cold	and	indifferent,	pure,	distant
and	neutral,	and	like	an	ocean	wave	let	him	hit	this	steaming	domesticity	with
his	separateness,	let	him	tear	me	away	from	Zosia	.	.	.	Oh,	come,	you	third	one,
come,	give	me	a	base	from	which	to	oppose	her,	allow	me	to	draw	from	you,	oh,
come,	life giving	breath,	come,	great	power,	unhitch	me,	knock	me	aside	and
carry	me	away!	But	Zosia	snuggled	up	even	more	lovingly,	warmly,	tenderly.
"Why	are	you	calling	out	and	shouting?	We're	alone	..."
And	she	raised	her	mug	to	me.	My	strength	failed	me,	dream	assailed	reality,	and
I	couldn't	help	it—I	had	to	kiss	her	mug	with	my	mug,	since	she	had	kissed	my
mug	with	her	mug.
And	now	come,	oh	mugs!	No,	I'm	not	saying	goodbye	to	you,	strange	and
unknown	mugs	of	strange	and	unknown	people	who	will	read	me,	I	say	hello	to
you,	hello,	graceful	bundles	of	body	parts,	now	let	it	all	begin—come,	step	up	to
me,	begin	your	kneading,	make	me	a	new	mug	so	I	will	again	have	to	run	from
you	and	into	other	people,	and	speed,	speed,	speed	through	all	mankind.	Because
there	is	no	escape	from	the	mug,	other	than	into	another	mug,	and	from	a	human
being	one	can	only	take	shelter	in	the	arms	of	another	human	being.	From	the
pupa,	however,	there	is	absolutely	no	escape.	Chase	me	if	you	want.	I'm	running
away,	mug	in	my	hands.
It's	the	end,	what	a	gas,	And	who's	read	it	is	an	ass!
W.G.{1}
	
This	was	Witold	Gombrowicz's	first	book,	later	completed	by	the	author	and	published	as	
Bakakaj.
{2}
	
See	Translator's	Note.
{3}
	
From	a	patriotic	song.
{4}
	
Sokoly	
in	the	original	text.	It	means	"falcons"	and	is	probably	based	on	
Sokols,	
gymnastic	societies	in
Czechoslovakia	promoting	festivals	in	which	as	many	as	ten	thousand	gymnasts	participated	simultaneously
(Encyclopeadia	Britannica,	vol.	10,	1970).
{5}
	
Based	on	a	poem	by	Zygmunt	Krasinski.
{6}
	
Gutta percha	is	a	tough	plastic	substance	obtained	from	the	latex	of	various	Malaysian	trees.
{7}
	
Block	of	wood	on	Ash	Wednesday—allegedly	a	custom	according	to	which	a	bachelor	who	failed	to
become	engaged	by	the	beginning	of	Lent	continues	to	have	a	small	block	of	wood	attached	to	him	on	Ash
Wednesday	(personal	communication).
{8}
	
Szmonces—a	
Jewish	quip.	Pronounced	"shmontzes."
{9}
	
Based	on	excerpts	from	Boy	Zelenski's	
Words.
{10}
	
Zouaves—	
the	name	given	to	certain	infantry	regiments	in	the	French	Army,	first	raised	in	Algeria	in
1831	(Encyclopaedia	Britannica,	vol.	23,1970).
{11}
	
Bigos—a	
Polish	dish	traditionally	served	after	a	hunt	and	consisting	of	sauerkraut	stewed	with	pieces
of	meat.	Pronounced	"beegos."
{12}
	
In	English	in	the	original	text.
{13}
	
Mane,	Tekel,	Fares	
is	the	writing	on	the	wall	that	appeared	during	Baltasar's	feast,	foretelling	the
doom	of	Babylon.
{14}
	
Starka—
from	"stara,"	meaning	old,	and	denoting	mature	rye	vodka.